Category: Editorial
Title: A Chinese buyin for BRICS Part Two

A Chinese buy-in for BRICS

Both WAICO and the WDO have also been projected as key initiatives for bridging the global digital divide, which, as mentioned earlier, is threatening to reach unbridgeable proportions due to lack of capacities in the wider Global South. China's efforts to position itself as the key force behind a multilateral effort for establishing inclusive digital governance are also reflected in its active support for implementing the interim arrangements for the WTO's plurilateral agreement on e-commerce. China has sensed the strategic opportunity arising from the US reluctance to engage in global digital and AI governance and is eager to capitalise on it.

The US preference for lack of coordinated global rules on digital trade and AI is ostensibly due to the difficulties that these can create for long-term commercial prospects of US big tech in global markets, especially in the Global South. The latter, including its prominent members  -  India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Brazil, Egypt, South Africa  -  are yet to domestically regulate on AI. US pressures for maximizing its business interests might have precipitated regulatory 'chills' in some of these countries.

At the same time, these countries are also pushing hard on building AI capacities, especially data centres, a significant number of which are funded by the US big-tech. In more other parts of the Global South, especially those embedded in China' Digital Silk Road, the AI infrastructure push, expectedly, has begun arising from Chinese AI firms, including export of open-access AI products. What is strategically significant is the buy-in that China's efforts to globally regulate has gathered among the Global South.

WAICO's founding members include major BRICS members and partners: Indonesia, Malaysia, Ethiopia, South Africa, Brazil, Russia, Belarus, Cuba, and Uzbekistan. The WDO has also been responded to enthusiastically with reports suggesting it has obtained more than 200 members from nearly 40 countries. The point is not whether Chinese rules are better or worse.

Indeed, the scope for such value judgement doesn't exist as there are no rules to compare the Chinese initiatives with. Critical perceptions suggest China's efforts to set global rules on AI and data follow from its ambitions to stay ahead in the global digital race and steal a march over US and its allies. That may well be so.

But for a Global South abandoned by the US, and barely embraced by Europe and Western middle powers, the Chinese alternative might be the only choice and the least inferior option. That is till the BRICS, or the UN, can arrive at better rules  -  the prospects of which are rather remote. Views are personal.

Written by Anamika Sinha The author is Senior Research Fellow and Research Lead (Trade and Economics), Institute of South Asian Studies, National University of Singapore.
