Category: Editorial
Title: A disservice to dignity of labour Part One

A disservice to dignity of labour

Barring transparency in implementation & social audits, new law undermines MGNREGA entitlements On Monday, with no prior consultation, the central government scheduled the introduction of a Bill to repeal the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) and replace it with the Viksit Bharat Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin) (VB-G RAM G) Bill, 2025. In fact, this Bill should have been two different pieces of legislation, because the MGNREGA and VB-G RAM G are fundamentally different in scope and objective. The Bill replaces MGNREGA's basic entitlement to ask for work.

In fact, there is no element of the right to work - although the object and reasons of the Bill are stated as "a bill to establish a rural development framework aligned with the national vision of Viksit Bharat @2047 by providing a statutory guarantee of 125 days' wage employment in every financial year to every rural household whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled manual work". Critics say G RAM G would end MGNREGA's 100-dayay job guarantee G RAM G undermines the fundamental guarantees that MGNREGA provided: A central government-funded, demand-driven employment programme, guaranteeing 100 days of work per household, anywhere in rural India. It repeals the MGNREGA and its statutory guarantees, replacing it with a central government scheme that provides no guarantees at all.

It actually takes us back to the days before MGNREGA, when programmes like the Jawahar Rozgar Yojana (JRY) and the Employment Assurance Scheme provided no more than a name of rural employment "assurance" and gave less than 10 days of work in most parts of India. Just four provisions of the proposed law will make it clear how false the statutory guarantee is. It is worth examining the key legal sections and sub-sections of the Bill and understanding their implications.

First, Section 4 (5) of the Bill states, "The central government shall determine the state-wise normative allocation for each financial year, based on objective parameters as may be prescribed by the central government." The MGNREGA bottom-up demand-based employment programme, guaranteeing 100 days of work per household by legislation, has been replaced by an allocation-based scheme, where the Centre and its bureaucratic machinery are at liberty to alter and determine the quantum of allocation. The norms and reasons are, in fact, prescribed by itself. Second, Section 5 (1) of the Bill demolishes the idea of a universal entitlement across rural India.

It states: "Save as otherwise provided, the state government shall in such rural areas in the state as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work, not less than 125 days of guaranteed employment in a financial year in accordance with the scheme made under this Act." The central government has thus made it clear that this scheme will only run in those parts of the country that it may notify. Even in those areas, it is the state government that is made responsible for providing 125 days of work as per central government norms. The enhancement from 100 to 125 is clearly a hollow promise because MGNREGA has suffered from being squeezed due to allocations that fail to meet demand for work.
