Category: Editorial
Title: A disservice to dignity of labour Part Two

A disservice to dignity of labour

As a result, even MGNREGA was only able to provide roughly 50-55 days of employment per year in the last five years. Third, if the states were to decide to provide their own resources to run an employment scheme that was more universal and robust, in order to reduce rural unemployment and distress, any money spent would be subject to the norms decided by the Centre. Section 4(6) states, "Any expenditure incurred by a state in excess of its normative allocation shall be borne by the state government in such manner and by such procedure as may be prescribed by the central government." Money provided by the states - norms decided by the Centre.

A fourth provision that is likely to render even the scheme under the new legislation a non-starter can be found in Section 22 (2), which states, "For the purposes of this Act, the fund sharing pattern between the central government and the state government shall be… 60:40." This is apart from the northeastern states, hill states, and Union Territories where the central government share will be 90:10. Under Section 22 of MGNREGA, the Centre provided 100% of the labour component (thus guaranteeing a national employment guarantee) and 75% of the material component. In other words, the central government's share was at least 90% of the total expenditure and responsibility for unemployment allowance and compensations for delayed payment of wages in case of a paucity of resources could clearly be placed on it.

Under the G RAM G scheme, it is very doubtful that the states would want to provide the 40% to fund a scheme where all the controls lie with the Centre. In all likelihood, the scheme would become a damp squib with neither employment guarantees attracting people nor sufficient central funds driving "empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation for a prosperous and resilient rural Bharat", as stated in the object and reasons of the Bill. Critics demand the Bill be rejected This Bill must be comprehensively rejected.

There is nothing in it in terms of "reform" that makes it more attractive or effective for the rural poor. MGNREGA has had many problems, but most have stemmed from poor implementation. It has served rural India well, and served India extremely well in times of economic distress. Much could have been strengthened within its own framework to help India deal with climate distress and better water and resource management.

MGNREGA is a people's law that came in with the popular slogan "Har haath ko kaam do, kaam ka pura daam do". It provided entitlements beyond 100 days of work, helped reform rural governance, and provided at least 10 entitlements that empowered people to fight for and secure their right to work. Barring transparency in implementation and social audits, this law undermines most of the entitlements of MGNREGA, including decentralised planning.

The objects outlined in the short title and the objects and reasons can never be achieved through G RAM G. In fact, to be true to the objects, the Bill should be withdrawn, and MGNREGA should be enhanced to 125 days at enhanced minimum wages. Only then will we move closer to the most reasonable demand of every Indian, "every hand getting work, and all work getting a just reward".
