Category: Editorial
Title: A future of financial health for every Indian Part Two

A future of financial health for every Indian

I want to thank the people in Mumbai and New Delhi who shared their stories with me. Four actions will help move financial health forward: First, further develop Jan Dhan 2.0 with financial health at the centre. As the Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) enters its second decade, there is an opportunity to transform accounts from simple payment and cash-withdrawal channels into a household financial resilience platform.

This means fully integrating the PMJDY with Direct Benefit Transfers (DBTs), PM-KISAN, MGNREGA wage payments (now VB-G RAM-G), e-Shram, the Atal Pension Yojana (APY), Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY), Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY), and other social protection schemes for informal and gig workers. Linking these programmes through a single account could help households build their financial health. Women, who hold the majority of PMJDY accounts, could particularly benefit, as would informal workers, migrants, and gig economy workers.

Second, build on India's robust digital public infrastructure to support better financial health. Innovations such as MahaVISTAAR, account aggregators, the Unified Lending Interface (ULI), DigiLocker, and emerging AI applications create opportunities to strengthen household financial capability, choice and agency at scale. Third, use India's rich ecosystem of household surveys, administrative datasets, and digital infrastructure to gather data on financial health.

This data could be used to strengthen policymaking, protect consumers, and ensure that the financial sector is accountable. Public-private collaboration Finally, build on the momentum to further mobilise financial institutions, employers, and market players. Government and regulators play a critical role in advancing households' financial health.

The impact is amplified when it is a joint effort with the private sector. Countries including the Netherlands and Indonesia are already pursuing such public-private collaboration. The vision of financial health is giving every person a better today, tomorrow, and future. Just as Nar should have the opportunity to save for a well-deserved restful retirement, all Indian families should have the financial policies, tools, and services that they need to thrive throughout their lives.

After my visit in June, I am looking forward to working with the Government of India to make this vision a reality. Her Majesty Queen Máxima of the Netherlands, is the United Nations Secretary-General's Special Advocate for Financial Health
