Category: Editorial
Title: A future of financial health for every Indian Part One

A future of financial health for every Indian

India's next leap should be to ensure financial health for all Nar has been working for 45 years and is one of the longest-serving caddies at his golf club. Although he had a bank account for years, like many informal workers, he was focused on earning a living and supporting his family, leaving little opportunity to plan for the future. That changed three years ago when he learned about the National Pension System and began saving for retirement for the first time.

Today, his fund is growing, giving him confidence that after a lifetime of hard work, he can retire with financial security and dignity. The meaning of financial health In June 2026, I visited India in my capacity as the United Nations Secretary-General's Special Advocate for Financial Health. I have been advocating for and learning about efforts to improve financial health, which means ensuring that people have the right financial policies, products, and services to manage day-to-day expenses, stay resilient when unexpected shocks occur, invest in and save for long-and short-term goals, and have confidence in the future.

In practice, this is like Nar's experience  -  going beyond having a bank account to having investments that will help him in the future. It could also mean a person having affordable home insurance to help if a flash flood causes damage to their house. Or, it could mean receiving responsible credit to help with bills during a tough month.

India has recently undergone a remarkable transformation. According to the World Bank's Global Findex, account ownership among adults has risen from around 56% to 89% in just 10 years. This progress in access is impressive, and it creates an opportunity to do more to support people's financial health.

A financial health approach will be beneficial not just for families but also for the country. Household and individual-level financial health are crucial for country-level resilient growth and prosperity. The Viksit Bharat 2047 goal to move from "welfare to wealth creation" would also be well supported by efforts to improve financial health, under the vision of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

During my visit, I saw how so many in India  -  from the highest levels of government to pioneering fintech companies  -  are doing financial health work. In New Delhi, I spoke with informal sector workers, who are now able to save, plan, and retire without relying on their children, thanks to opening retirement accounts with support from Universal Pensions. In Mumbai, I spoke with nurses at a hospital who have found more financial stability and decreased stress through workplace financial health products offered by SalarySe, such as responsible credit, individualised financial health scores, and insurance.

I met with regulators and bank leaders who are using innovation and Artificial Intelligence (AI) to help households make better financial decisions, grow their savings and investments, build resilience through access to insurance, and tackle challenges such as fraud and scams. Reserve Bank of India Governor Sanjay Malhotra and I discussed how India can expand on these opportunities to support financial health in the country. Steps to take In my conversations with Indian people from different walks of life, I heard directly how financial products and services could further build their trust in institutions and give them the support that they need to improve their financial lives.
