Category: Editorial
Title: A lawless world Part Two

A lawless world

India, which is threatened by an expansionist China's threats to its own turf, has done neither of these things - or come up with a peace plan, which Beijing is working on. At another level, the principle of sovereignty, implying a state's control over its territory, has been violated by Russia in Ukraine and the US in Iran. Moscow has justified its scorched-earth aggression in Ukraine in the name of reconquering a country that seceded in 1991 when the former Soviet Union collapsed, although post-Soviet Russia recognised its statehood.

Donald Trump, meanwhile, continues to cast covetous eyes on Greenland and Cuba - while offensively declaring that Canada should be the 51st state of the US. Trump's boast that his "own morality" is the only limit on his global powers frightens the world, given how destructive he appears to most countries. Washington's dismissal of the rules-based order as being "founded in naivete or gauzy abstractions" should warn Delhi that it couldn't care less about the Indo-Pacific, where China is the main threat to the territorial sovereignty of many Asian countries.

In fact, Trump wrote off India by calling for a meeting with China in a G-2 last November. Delhi's call to Tehran to reopen the Strait of Hormuz will not raise India's stature in Trump's eyes. India's credibility as an economic partner of West Asian countries, where US embassies have been attacked by Iran, rested on its apparent respect for the upholding of international law.

There is scant evidence of that respect at the moment. India should note that energy-hungry Asian friends are facing economic crises as the US and Israel continue to infringe international law. The Philippines has declared an energy emergency. Neighbouring Sri Lanka has introduced a four-day work week.

In Bangladesh, which imports 65% of gas from Qatar, some facilities have already shut down. Additionally, India's fertiliser sector could be heading for a production shortfall because it relies on West Asia and the Strait of Hormuz for fertiliser imports. A fertiliser shortage could further trigger a food crisis as seeds must be planted at a climatically favourable time.

A country's credibility and reliability are indispensable for global security. India and other middle powers can only gain political and economic weight if they stand their ground on the necessity for international law instead of keeping mum as 'false friends' violate it and throw the world into severe economic and social crises. A world without international law provides no mechanism for accountability.

It endangers the sovereignty and survival of any state and portends harrowing political and socio-economic consequences. To prevent such tragedies, international law must survive. By Anita Inder Singh The writer is a founding professor at the Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution
