Category: Editorial
Title: A lawless world Part One

A lawless world

Ongoing conflicts in Ukraine, Gaza and Iran expose the erosion of international law, with major powers prioritising national interest over global norms, triggering economic shocks and energy crises worldwide. Ukraine, Gaza, Iran - these invasions by Russia, the US, and Israel have violated the top priorities of international law, which are the prevention of war and crimes against humanity. There has been no legal justification for the transgressions.

States do not follow international law if it clashes with their national interests. But how could anyone have imagined that aggression by so-called friendly states would affect the global economy and take the war into people's homes? For instance, many Asian countries are affected as they have inadequate cooking gas supplies and petrol for their cars.

With barely 60 days of petrol stock left, India is in a worse position than China (90-110 days). Violators have included the American superpower and important regional military powers like Russia and Israel. When two members of the United Nations Security Council break international law, they show how excessive and unaccountable power makes the world a most dangerous place.

For example, Israel has used hunger as a weapon of war in Gaza, like Russia in Ukraine. Washington has threatened death and destruction all day long in Iran. Evidently, the US, Israel, and Russia have replaced the principle of the rule of law by "might is right" in the international system. Apparently, these countries believe that international law is irrelevant to their conduct on the global stage when it comes to the use of military force.

Their unchecked warfare shows that international law is struggling to restrain the powerful. Retaliatory Iranian attacks on American embassies Retaliatory Iranian attacks on American embassies in Gulf countries including Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates - which are not participating in the conflict - have also been transgressions, but they have not lessened American or Israeli wrongdoing. By supporting or failing to condemn the violations because of their national interests - defined largely by dependence on the US or Islamophobia - some countries have corroded international law and have shielded the invaders from accountability.

When Russia launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the international condemnation from Europe and most of Asia was loud and clear. But the double standards of most European countries who have sermonised about universal values are exposed by their muted response to US and Israeli aggression and the killing of civilians in Gaza and Iran. Only France, Spain, and Norway have highlighted the US' breach of international law in Iran.

Every Russian, American, Israeli, or Iranian attack on civilians as well as energy and desalination plants has disproved the existence of international law as the indispensable framework for global conduct. China and India abstained from condemning Russia's invasion of Ukraine while preaching that "all countries deserve respect for their sovereignty and territorial integrity." Bejing and law of the jungle Now, Beijing warns that "the law of the jungle" prevails and has blamed the US for attacking Iran without providing evidence of any threat posed by Tehran's nuclear and missile programmes to US security. China has also highlighted illegal military actions by the US and Israel against Iran as the root cause of the Strait of Hormuz's obstruction.
