Category: Editorial
Title: A rising graph On the doping culture in

A rising graph: On the doping culture in Indian sports

Doping is now a deep-rooted culture in Indian sports At least 13 doping positives in the run-up to the recent Commonwealth Games and the upcoming Asian Games have again put India in an embarrassing spotlight. For a country that has been notoriously leading the global doping charts for three consecutive years, the spate of positive results across disciplines including athletics, weightlifting, wrestling, wushu and judo, has not only brought shame but has also robbed India of some berths in these prestigious events. The dope-tainted names have forced authorities to pull them out of the Aichi-Nagoya Asian Games squad.

More such names are expected to trickle out in the coming weeks. Lucrative cash incentives for Asian Games medallists are a major factor driving athletes and coaches to take shortcuts, risking their health and reputation, as well as the country's pride. While the spike in dope-positive results ahead of major multi-sport events is not new, the jump this time is a cause for concern.

The matter getting raised during the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) workshops in Delhi, the Athletics Integrity Unit (AIU) downgrading India due to an extremely high risk of doping, and an international agency recently conducting surprise tests in Bhubaneswar and Bengaluru indicate the seriousness of the issue. Even though National Sports Federations have been expressing concern, it cannot be said that they are strict to the core to curb the menace. Despite being seriously understaffed, the National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA), which shoulders the primary anti-doping responsibility in India, has significantly increased the number of tests and raids based on intelligence gathering.

But it needs to do more in a vast and populous country to discourage doping. Besides, NADA needs to get out of the government's control to function truly independently in order to enhance its effectiveness. Proper implementation of the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Act, 2025, to give more powers to NADA and its allied bodies, is another requirement.

With dope testing becoming costlier and NADA needing more staff, the government can bolster the fight against doping by increasing the overall budget allocation, which was reduced in the current budget. The other challenge is to cut the supply line, as India has become a hub for the trade in banned substances sourced from different countries. An Indian serving a jail term in Kenya for illegally importing performance-enhancing drugs stands as proof of this.

As India prepares for the 2030 Commonwealth Games and hopes to host the Olympics in the future, it needs to act resolutely to weed out a deep-rooted doping culture in Indian sports.
