Category: Editorial
Title: Act of evil On the Delhi blast

Act of evil: On the Delhi blast

Promoting social harmony is integral to any counterterrorism strategy An explosion in a moving car near Red Fort in Delhi on the evening of November 10, 2025, which killed 13 people and injured several others, has led to the police invoking the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) and the Explosives Act. The suggestion is that the incident is being investigated as an act of terrorism. The National Investigation Agency is in charge of the investigation.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah have vowed to bring the culprits to justice while the Opposition has sought accountability from the government. The suspect linked to the vehicle has been identified as Umar-un-Nabi, a doctor from Pulwama district in Kashmir. The pattern of developments in recent days suggest that the suspect, who died in the blast, was linked to a ring of other people who were allegedly plotting terror strikes in the country.

The public will have to wait for greater clarity until investigators are in a position to reveal more information. At this juncture, speculation and rhetoric must be avoided, and no effort should be spared by the government, the Opposition and the media to promote peace and calm in India in the face of this deeply troubling incident. Mindless violence targeting innocent civilians has long been a scourge for India.

However, organised incidents of terrorism have been confined to conflict zones in recent years. The blast in the national capital is, therefore, alarming. Counterterrorism has been a topic of polarising debates in India and around the world. In the Indian context, the idea that an allegedly 'soft state' allows terrorism has been popularised by the Bharatiya Janata Party, which has been in power since 2014.

The Centre has tweaked laws in order to empower investigators, and making it difficult for any accused to defend against terror charges. Hard laws have been accompanied by sweeping security measures by central and State forces. And a smart and effective security policy is indicated by the absence of incidents, that go unnoticed, even as a single lapse can cause a major event and public outcry.

It is notable that a potentially more dangerous conspiracy of a chemical terror strike may have been averted with the arrests of several people across States, as well as the recovery of arms, explosives and other material. That said, it is reasonable to assume that policing is only one component of any comprehensive national security approach. A rapid and transparent investigation should be followed by proactive political measures by the government to reassure the citizenry.

Terrorist strategy universally is to trigger social chaos and undermine the legitimacy of the state. An effective counterterrorism strategy must also promote social harmony and reinforce the legitimacy of the state.
