Category: Editorial
Title: An exploration of Indias minerals diplomacy Part Two

An exploration of India's minerals diplomacy

Russia could be an important hedge, not a foundation. New frontiers Latin America presents India's new frontiers with expanded engagement in Argentina, Chile, Peru and, increasingly, Brazil. These countries are becoming central to global copper, nickel and rare-earth strategies. There have been substantial investments by public and private sector companies from India into projects in these regions.

Khanij Bidesh India Limited (KABIL) has signed a ₹200 crore exploration and development agreement with Argentina. However, competition for Indian companies is intense, and engagement remains at an early stage. A lasting presence will require value-chain partnerships and local processing, not extraction-only agreements.

With the restoration of diplomatic ties with Canada recently, Ottawa emerges as an important player. With reserves of nickel, cobalt, copper and rare earths, and a recently signed trilateral agreement with Australia and India, Canada has potential to become a strong minerals partner. Yet, political stability between the two countries will be key.

Develop integrated partnerships Across all regions, lessons converge. Securing ore is not enough. The choke point is processing. Without domestic refining and midstream capability, India remains exposed to supply chain vulnerabilities. Technology, innovation and on-ground project implementation matters far more than announcements.

India must use its country-by-country approach to build resilience across the value-chain. Africa, Australia, Canada and Latin America for upstream ore extraction; West Asia (the Gulf) and Japan for midstream processing of the mineral ores; the EU and the U.S. for downstream technology creation such as batteries and recycling, and Russia for diversification.

While it is important for India to be also open to cooperation with additional partners, such as South Korea and Indonesia, it first needs to have a clear strategic vision for existing partnerships. None of this will deliver results unless India strengthens its domestic framework for responsible mining with issues such as Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) and transparency increasingly becoming a key issue in international partnerships. India has built an impressive web of critical minerals partnerships.

The next step is to deepen what works, rethink what does not, and ensure technology, processing and long-term certainty. Anindita Sinh is Research Associate at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress (CSEP). Pooja Ramamurthi is Fellow at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress (CSEP)
