Category: Editorial
Title: Apparently wealth is for men and work is for Part One

Apparently, wealth is for men and work is for women

For reducing global wealth inequality, policies to tackle gender wealth inequality are as essential as policies to tackle household wealth inequality The World Inequality Report 2026 was published this June by the World Inequality Lab, Paris School of Economics. The UN report 'Counting What Counts' was released this May. The first focuses on inequality head on.

The second does so in part. Both pay some attention to gender inequality. But how? By focusing entirely on women's unequal position in the labour market. Dare we ask: What about wealth inequality? Neither report mentions women and wealth, although the WIR spends many ungendered chapters on household wealth inequality.

So, what are these reports implying? That wealth is only for men while women are merely labour? The vast body of academic research on women's economic status over the decades has focused mainly on one thing: Women's situation in the labour market. This persistent mismeasurement of women's economic status by ignoring gender inequality in wealth and assets in numerous papers, reports and policy briefs makes the main source of gendered economic inequality in much of the world, invisible and ignored in policy.

Work by feminist economists does not entirely escape this bias. Why is measuring gendered inequality in wealth so important? Not just to correct serious conceptual flaws in measuring gender inequality, but also because wealth/asset ownership (a) affects women's and children's well-being in ways that employment alone does not; (b) impacts productivity and economic growth; and (c) is key to most sources of decent work and earnings.

Consider each. First, a vast body of global empirical evidence over three decades (1994-2024), starting from that cited in my 1994 book, A Field of One's Own, till today, shows that in the Global South if the mother owns assets, child survival, health and education outcomes are likely to be significantly better than if only the father owns assets. Gender matters beyond class.

Owning immovable assets also hugely reduces women's risk of domestic violence and of poverty in case of marital breakdown. Second, several studies, including those collated by the Food and Agriculture Organisation show that if women have access to a productive asset like farmland and related inputs it can greatly increase farm productivity and a country's agricultural growth rates. Third, for vast numbers of women, especially in the Global South, owning productive assets is essential for viable livelihoods since women are employed largely in the informal sector and especially in agriculture.

In India, for instance, in the Periodic Labour Force Survey 2023-24, two aspects stand out. One, some 86 per cent of all women workers (rural and urban) and 91 per cent of rural women workers are informally employed. About 77 per cent of the latter work in agriculture. Two, 73 per cent of rural women workers are "self-employed", mostly as unpaid workers on family farms or in small business enterprises, including street-vending.

Hence, barely a quarter of rural women workers (and a third of all women workers) are in wage employment (regular or casual). For the rest, who are self-employed, asset ownership is key to viable earnings: For example, land for farming; carts or stalls for street vending, and so on. However, as diverse data sources (NFHS, ICRISAT, IHDS) consistently show, Indian women own land in only 12-16 per cent of rural landowning households, even though many are de-facto farmers as mainly men out-migrate to non-farm jobs.
