Category: Editorial
Title: Apparently wealth is for men and work is for Part Two

Apparently, wealth is for men and work is for women

For these women farmers, owning land, farm tools, and other assets is complementary to their ability to work and earn. The same argument applies to small businesses. Yet, both the WIR and UN Reports use average hourly earnings as the primary measure of women's economic status, ignoring their wealth/asset status and hence greatly undercount economic gender inequalities.

Also, by conflating women's "unpaid" work with domestic work hours they fail to capture women's unpaid productive work on family farms and businesses. Third, using the ratio of female to male hourly earnings as a measure of gender inequality, as done by both reports, is itself problematic. Most people don't earn by the "hour".

Returns from self-employment, in particular, cannot be converted easily into "hourly" earnings. How would you measure, say, the hourly earnings of a farmer, shopkeeper, or vegetable vendor who rarely record hours worked? At the very least the measure should be female/male annual earnings. Fourth, the WIR attributes women's lower (than male) employment rates globally to inadequate access to affordable childcare, transport, family leave, and hiring discrimination, again ignoring asset ownership.

The impact of lower pay for women on their wealth accumulation is mentioned in passing, but as the Paris Lab has itself established, the main contributor to wealth inequality is inheritance, not earnings. A common excuse for not measuring gender inequality in wealth is lack of data. This elides the issue.

First, there is existing data on some indicators: For instance, in the Global North, pension-wealth data are available by gender in many countries, as is gender information on the richest 1 per cent. In the Global South, gendered data on land owned are available for a growing number of countries (FAO and World Bank). Second, the World Inequality Lab (Paris) actively mines data and has successfully persuaded many governments to collect/share wealth data.

Even with incomplete data, some gender estimates are possible. Equally important is acknowledging that labour market analysis barely touches the surface of economic inequality by gender. Moreover, for reducing global wealth inequality, policies to tackle gender wealth inequality are as essential as policies to tackle household wealth inequality.

But the two sets of policies cannot be identical, since the former also need to grapple with intra-household inequalities. Ignoring gender gaps in wealth and focusing only on women's labour implies that the authors of the two reports, all progressive thinkers, are fine with a world where only men yield capital while women sell their labour. Even Marx (despite his limited gender analysis) would feel uncomfortable with that scenario in the twenty-first century.

Written by: Bina Agarwal The writer is professor of Development Economics and Environment, GDI, University of Manchester; and former director, Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi
