Category: Editorial
Title: Are there gaps in Indias economic data Part One

Are there gaps in India's economic data?

IMF has raised concerns over national accounts and prices data, in its Article IV consultations Estimates of India's gross domestic product (GDP) and, therefore, the rate at which Indian economy is growing, have come under a scanner after the International Monetary Fund (IMF) recently made observations for the second successive year on the quality of the country's national accounts statistics. The IMF gave India's national accounts data an overall rating of 'C' on a four point scale at the end of the annual health check of its members' economies, known as Article IV Consultation.

The IMF explained that its 'C' rating was because the data provided by the Indian government had "some shortcomings" which "somewhat hamper surveillance". Though the IMF began rating its member countries' data quality during its Article IV consultations from early 2024 under the new framework for "Data Adequacy Assessment for Surveillance", it has made frequent references to the data gaps existing in India's official data even during the past Article IV consultations, especially in 2023. While India's national accounts statistics received an overall rating of 'C', the coverage of the data on prices and government finances were also rated similarly.

In other words, the IMF has underlined the fact that India's official statistics do not allow proper review of policies and the performance of the Indian economy, one of the key objectives of the Article IV consultations. The IMF made several specific concerns on the quality of India's GDP data. The first is the outdated base year, which currently is 2011-12.

Though the current base year was introduced in 2015, the government may have decided to postpone embarking upon the exercise to update it due to the twin disruptions the economy experienced owing to demonetisation in 2016, followed by the introduction of the GST in 2017. Even before the economy could absorb the effects of these disruptions, the pandemic caused another major upheaval. The government has already announced that the base year reset would happen early next year, when 2022-23 would be adopted as the new base year.

The IMF identifies the second weakness in India's official statistics as the use of wholesale price index (WPI) as the data source for estimating real GDP in the absence of producer price index (PPI). The latter index is more policy relevant as it reflects the price received by the producers, while the former reflects the price of a product when it reaches the market. The relevance of PPI can immediately be understood in the context of Indian agriculture, a sector in which tracking the prices received by the farmers at the farm gate is vitally important to make appropriate policies for improving their conditions.

With the NDA government having taken the policy decision to substantially increase farmers' income, IMF's insistence on the use of PPI is, therefore, particularly relevant. GDP estimation Yet another major deficiency in India's national accounts statistics the IMF has highlighted is the sizeable discrepancies between production and expenditure approaches. Ideally, GDP estimations using these two approaches should converge but in the case of India, the discrepancies have been large in the past several quarters and have often been 3 per cent or more.
