Category: Editorial
Title: Are there gaps in Indias economic data Part Two

Are there gaps in India's economic data?

The size of the discrepancies, according to the IMF, indicates that there may be a need to enhance the coverage of the expenditure approach data and to better capture the informal sector. Over the past decade and a half, yawning gaps have appeared in data capture raising serious questions regarding the accuracy of the GDP data. There is hardly any doubt that the delay in conducting the decadal census, which is not expected before end-2027, has severely affected the database of the Indian economy.

Furthermore, the Economic Census, one of the more reliable data sources providing complete account of all establishments engaged in production and/or distribution of goods and services, has also not been conducted after the Sixth Economic Census was conducted in 2013-14. Although work on the Seventh Economic Census was initiated in 2019, and the government had announced that the exercise was completed in 2023, the results of this exercise have not been made public. In other words, the database of the Indian economy looks very thin indeed.

Data gaps pertaining to India's large informal sector are seemingly the worst. Official estimates are that this sector accounts for 45-50 per cent of India's GDP/GVA and, therefore, non-availability of reliable numbers on this sector can adversely affect not only the GDP estimates but also making of policies related to this vulnerable sector. Unorganised sector Let us understand what these numbers mean for policymaking.

The situation prevailing in non-agricultural unorganised sector (excluding construction) was captured in the past by the National Sample Surveys, the two most recent of which were conducted during 2010-11 and 2015-16. In 2021-22, the government decided to conduct Annual Surveys of Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE), excluding agriculture and construction. Comparison of key numbers from these two sets of surveys show worrying trends.

NSS surveys showed that the share of the unorganised sector in India's GDP was 9 per cent, but ASUSE shows that this sector had shrunk to 6 per cent. On the other hand, while NSS Survey showed more than 11 crore people were engaged in the unorganised sector in 2015-16, ASUSE showed that this figure was below 12 crore in 2023-24. These numbers contradict the government's claim of greater formalisation (and hence improvement) of the informal sector workers, constituting about 20 per cent of the workforce.

Are we then to believe that these surveys are not reliable? Data gaps on the MSMEs, accounting for about 30 per cent of the GDP, are even more stark, since detailed data for this sector are not available since the Fourth Census was conducted in 2009. In its Article IV consultations in 2023, the IMF had emphasised that lack of detailed, up-to-date information about the MSME sector must be seen as a problem for policymakers.

The government, therefore, needs to take a call as to whether it should continue narrating India's growth story before estimating the GDP numbers based on more reliable data since the available numbers do not adequately capture economic realities of the country's economically marginalised. By Biswajit Dhar The writer is a Trade Economist and former Professor, Jawaharlal Nehru University
