Category: Editorial
Title: At BRICS India must bank on the NDB Part Two

At BRICS, India must bank on the NDB

Regardless of how the bottleneck is resolved, there is merit in reprioritising the NDB within BRICS. So far, the bank has served Delhi well. It has secured commitments of nearly $10 billion across 32 projects, including metro rail systems and the Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut RRTS corridor. It is not a small feat, but expanding the NDB's operations to be on par with other multilateral lenders would require extending such a bargain to many more emerging markets and developing countries.

It is also a noteworthy strength of the NDB that it has a marked preference for local-currency lending. This mechanism appeals to emerging economies, especially at a time when the volatility in foreign-exchange markets is sustained because of global wars, both military and economic. It is an alternative way to reduce reliance on the dollar without replacing it as a currency for trade invoicing.

The bank's 2022-26 General Strategy commits to 30% of its lending and borrowing in member countries' local currencies, even as the bulk of its lending and borrowing remains in dollars. Whatever local currency lending does exist is skewed heavily in favour of the Renminbi  -  just a few days ago, the NDB priced a ¥7 billion (~$1.04 billion) three-year Panda bond in the China Interbank bond market. In 2026, issuance of such bonds has gone up approximately 91% year-on-year, per Chinese data.

Pushing the rupee bond It is time for India to push the long-delayed rupee bond over the line. First discussed in 2016, and subsequently slated for October 2023 and then for end-March 2026, the debut issuance was described by NDB President Dilma Rousseff in May as being at its "final stage," two months after the bank floated a rupee bond programme to mobilise around ₹25,000 crore over five years. Further, given the fact that the 2026 New Delhi Declaration did not feature a meaningful agreement on mobilising the NDB, India's focus in BRICS next year should be on simpler fixes to local-currency challenges.

Unlike the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, whose Summit recently concluded with bare-minimum outcomes, BRICS has tangible economic tools and a wider membership than ever before. In a world drifting towards subscription multilateralism, with Washington's pay-to-shape-the-rules Board of Peace as its latest specimen, these arrangements are the only way the grouping will truly set itself apart. (Amit Kumar and Anushka Saxena are researchers at the Takshashila Institution.

Views are personal to the authors and do not represent those of the Institution. Graphic Data Source: NDB; Investor Presentation June 2026 & Annual Report 2025; created by the authors)
