Category: Editorial
Title: Banks should grow but without compromising

Banks should grow, but without compromising stability

There are many reasons why a consolidation strategy alone cannot produce world-scale banks in India Why can't India foster large banks to compete in the global league? This debate has been stirred once again, with the Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman raising it in a banking conclave last week. An analysis by this newspaper shows that the combined assets of all the scheduled commercial banks in India at about $3.3 trillion, comes up to barely half the size of the single largest bank in China - Industrial and Commercial Bank - which holds $6.7 trillion in assets.

The last round of mergers could not alter this scenario. Between 2017 and 2020, SBI associates folded into the parent and later, smaller PSU banks merged into larger ones. Despite this, no Indian bank is anywhere near a leading American or Chinese bank in size. The behemoth SBI, whose business crossed ₹100 lakh crore recently, figures 43rd in S&P Global's world ranking of banks, with only two Indian banks making it to the top 100.

There are many reasons why a consolidation strategy alone cannot produce world-scale banks in India. One, it is credit demand which decides the scale of banks in an economy. With prudential lending norms disqualifying a sizeable section of small businesses and individuals in India from accessing the banking system, credit offtake limits the size of the banking system.

Bank credit has expanded at over 15 per cent per annum over the last five years but still stands at just ₹189 lakh crore ($ 2.1 trillion). Two, banking like other Indian industries, faces capital constraints. To scale up their loan franchise, banks must demonstrate capital adequacy. With India's regulatory ecosystem frowning upon industrial groups controlling banks, banks are reliant on either public investors or the government for their equity capital.

With many demands upon the fisc, the government, unlike the Chinese one, cannot infuse large sums into banks. Meanwhile, the deposit base for Indian banks has grown at just 9 per cent in the last five years, a pace much slower than credit growth. Three, regulatory norms designed to protect depositors and fulfil social objectives also act as a constraint on bank growth, with Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) and Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) requirements sequestering over 21 per cent of deposits and priority sectors taking up 40 per cent of net bank credit.

Four, with Reserve Bank of India rightly prioritising systemic stability, Indian banks cannot take on large capital market exposures or dabble in activities such as investment banking. These activities are significant drivers of bank growth in the Western world, but they expose the financial system to periodic blow-ups. Overall, conservative regulations which have held back the growth of banks in India have also made for greater stability and depositor confidence.

Policymakers should allow the banking sector to expand organically with the economy. Large funding needs for infrastructure or energy are best met by specialised institutions such as NABFID, IREDA or PFC, and not banks which will risk asset-liability mismatches.
