Category: Editorial
Title: Banking Todos (6)

A performance audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of the Green India
Mission (GIM) has found that a scheme conceived to heal India's forests had, across a
decade, achieved almost nothing it set out to do. Instead of improving forest quality over 1.4
million hectares, the mission only managed 0.11 million not even a tenth of the target. On
expanding forest cover, the mission barely scraped together four per cent. The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) channels money
collected from industry for diverting forest land into afforestation, while the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, now re-branded as VB-G RAM G funds rural wage labour that
can be used for plantation and land-restoration works, but GIM's intended convergence with these
schemes never materialised. The mission was one of the eight pillars of the National Action Plan on
Climate Change, unveiled in 2008, and the instrument through which India promised the Paris
Agreement an additional carbon sink of 2.5 billion to 3 billion tonnes by 2030. Its animating idea was
ecological - biodiversity, water, sequestration, and the revival of habitat. GIM however seems to be on
the back burner and, for all practical purposes, replaced by a tree plantation drive called 'Ek Ped Maa
Ke Naam (A Tree in the Name of Mother)'. Launched in 2024, the government reports planting 140 crore
saplings so far, but the latest forest data expose the gulf between a tree and a forest. The India State of
Forest Report 2023 records a gain of 1,445 square kilo-metres in green cover but only 156 sq km of it is
true forest. The rest, 1,289 sq km, is 'tree cover outside recorded forests.' Within the recorded forests,
dense canopy is thinning into scrub. Ergo, India is planting more and foresting less.
Few examples encapsulate this as much as the controversy over the Aravallis. Arguably the country's
most degraded range its hillocks quarried away, its native growth overrun by the invasive 'vilayati kikar'
(Prosopis juliflora) - it is now to be rescued by a 'Green Wall' of fresh planting. But these arboreal
conscripts cannot undo the damage from years of mining, halt encroachment, or summon back an
ecosystem that took millennia to form. Restoration is not land-scaping. The CAG's instrument is
accountancy: it can count hectares and rupees, not the worth of a living forest; and its assessment
cannot always capture the practical challenges of implementing missions. However, its verdict still
lands. A mission to restore India's forests has been allowed to wither while the state busies itself
counting trees.