Category: Editorial
Title: Beyond tickboxes Part Two

Beyond tick-boxes

It's also worth noting that Trump has been demanding sharply lower policy rates since his return to office, and it's policymakers' judicious decision to move slowly that has instead been vindicated. During that time, inflation has stubbornly refused to converge on the Fed's 2% target, and it's now started to move higher again as the US-Israeli conflict with Iran pressures energy prices. Central Bank Autonomy Over time, independent central banks deliver the best outcomes for households, including lower inflation and more sustainable economic growth.

When central banks fall under political influence, officials tend to juice growth in election years and ignore the long-run inflationary consequences to everyone's detriment. The integrity of leadership transitions is one important part of that. Evidence from 28 economies shows that politically motivated changes in central bank leadership are predominantly an emerging-market phenomenon, according to an IMF working paper published last month by Marijn A.

Bolhuis, Rui C. Mano and Hedda Thorell. In developing nations since 2000, 48% of transitions were politically motivated, while only 13% classified as such in developed markets, according to the paper, "The Macroeconomic Consequences of Undermining Central Bank Independence: Evidence from Governor Transitions." Trump is single-handedly helping to lower America's standards of central bank transitions to the levels of India and Argentina, two of the developing countries named in the paper.

Ultimately, the most important question is still how Warsh carries himself as Powell's successor. In his bid to win the nomination, the erstwhile hawk (known for years as a harsh critic of the Fed's large balance sheet) has reinvented himself as a rate-cutting dove and, in so doing, ingratiated himself with the president. Yet, he still has many supporters who point to his years of service at the central bank during the financial crisis; and with inflation on the rise, many of his backers suspect he'll find the spine to confront Trump once he's safely confirmed for the job.

Even if that's the case, Trump's efforts to undermine the transition itself will leave a lasting mark on the history of the Fed, and Americans will pay for his reckless assault on Fed independence for years to come.
