Category: Editorial
Title: Beyond tickboxes Part One

Beyond tick-boxes

TCS episode exposes systemic gaps in workplace safeguards and disclosure norms across India Inc Jerome Powell's tenure as chair of the Federal Reserve is winding down, and the Kevin Warsh era is nigh. But President Donald Trump seems intent on intimidating Powell until the bitter end, making the transition as difficult and volatile as possible. That malicious impulse will cause lasting institutional damage to the world's most important central bank.

On Tuesday, Justice Department officials made an unannounced visit to the central bank's offices as part of an ongoing investigation into cost overruns related to building renovations, according to a Wall Street Journal report. The latest salvo is just another chapter in a thinly veiled effort to punish Powell for not lowering policy rates, as Trump would prefer, despite now rising headline inflation. The officials were turned away from the active construction site over safety and clearance protocols, Bloomberg News reported.

Shortly after those reports, Fox Business broadcast an interview on Wednesday in which Trump signaled he'd push for the investigation to continue and would seek to fire Powell if he doesn't step away from his post in time (presumably by May, when his term is technically over). "I'll have to fire him, OK, if he's not leaving on time," Trump said. Transition Under Siege Trump can't seem to stop needling the Fed chair, but to what end?

Powell is scheduled to leave the role in about a month, and Warsh, his would-be replacement, is set for a confirmation hearing with the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday. All signs suggest that Trump could have his chosen Fed chair in place by mid-May if he would simply allow the transition to play out in a normal and orderly manner. Yet, he inexplicably refuses to do so.

By behaving in this manner, he's both eroding central bank independence and undermining his own stated objectives. North Carolina Republican Thom Tillis has signaled he will block Warsh's confirmation until the investigation is over  -  not because he has anything against Warsh, but because he wants this charade to end. (After news of the prosecutors' visit, Tillis posted a photo of the Three Stooges on X, along with the caption: "The U.S.

Attorney's Office for D.C. at the crime scene.") Likewise, Powell  -  who can technically stay on the Fed's Board of Governors until 2028, even after his term as chair ends  -  has said he will break with recent precedent and stick around as a governor until the DOJ inquiry is "well and truly over," apparently his way of protecting the Fed's independence. In addition to the attack on Powell, Trump has also sought to push out Fed Governor Lisa Cook, and Powell's presence helps pad the rate-setting committee against such attacks, with a critical mass of independent technocrats.

What's more, if Warsh hasn't been confirmed, Powell has said that he would act as chair pro tempore. That could lead to lead to a legal clash in the weeks ahead if Trump tries to intervene. All in all, it's clear that Trump is fighting for the sake of fighting, without a logical endgame. Nobody stands to win  -  not Trump, not Warsh and certainly not the American people.
