Category: Editorial
Title: BRICS IndiaChina and the return of Asia Part One

BRICS, India-China and the return of Asia

India and China can appreciate how their own futures are bound up in the rise of Asia without having to concur on its political make-up What makes the New Delhi BRICS Summit sidelines meeting between Narendra Modi and Xi Jinping noteworthy is not any pronouncement of a dramatic reconciliation between the two Asian giants. The encounter is subtler in its import. It suggests that India and China are developing a political lexicon that accommodates both rivalry and cooperation simultaneously, framing their bilateral differences within a broader realignment of global affairs.

One should take what comes out of such a meeting seriously, but not read it too literally. In agreeing "differences should not become disputes" and vowing a "fair, reasonable, and mutually acceptable" way forward on the boundary issue, both leaders were at one. For his part, Modi restated the case for mutual respect, sensitivity, and interest; Xi said India and China would be "partners rather than rivals".

As profound as the differences between them are, they do not eliminate them. States do not usually make headway in international politics by permanently resolving their differences; they get used to positioning themselves around them. Rivalries are positional The upshot of the Modi-Xi meeting is that positional rivalries are dynamic.

India and China are still in competition. They cannot wish away the asymmetries of economic power, the unresolved boundary dispute and what transpired in 2020, or China's ties with Pakistan and India's with the United States, its allies, and other regional projects. Modi was clear that an "essential basis" for any bilateral relations is peace and tranquillity on the border.

However, rivalry is a relationship born of the positions states hold vis-à-vis each other, not an identity. Those positions are subject to change. The India-China relationship is a case in point: At times they have been postcolonial partners, at others developing-country collaborators or strategic adversaries, sometimes simply Asian competitors.

No single description has ever been wholly apt. Hence the significance of the latest exchange. Institutional contact has resumed, and bilateral trade has reached a new peak; structural imbalances in trade, market access, supply chains, and mobility are now on the table. In short, there is an effort to put some workable order to the relationship even as the competition continues.

Strategic accommodation can exist without the rivalry vanishing. A global balance at work Then there is the broader consideration. Relations between major powers are never purely bilateral; they are part of how power is distributed in the system. Looking only at New Delhi and Beijing misses the mark when it comes to India and China.

China's rise has brought India into closer contact with the US, Japan, Australia and Europe by changing its strategic environment. However, things are in flux once more. American power remains as formidable as ever, though more transactional in its application, while Russia's stand-off with the West, wars in Eurasia and West Asia, tariff politics, and the heft of the Global South are creating a more complex distribution of power.

Add in technological fragmentation and supply-chain worries, and neither country can reduce the other to a simple bilateral security problem. In the Chinese telling of the meeting, Modi is quoted as saying that in pursuing an independent foreign policy, India is "not affected by any third party" in its dealings with China. This is not to be taken as a move to put distance between India and Washington.
