Category: Editorial
Title: BRICS IndiaChina and the return of Asia Part Two

BRICS, India-China and the return of Asia

It is a statement of strategic autonomy in its most basic form: That India's ties with the great powers need not be exclusive. For its own reasons, Beijing has to ensure that its relationship with India does not turn into a permanently adversarial one amid its strategic contest with the United States. The new international system is thus giving both countries a reason to compartmentalise their competition.

In the process, the global distribution of power is being shaped by, and is shaping, their bilateralism. Is Asia becoming imaginable again? The divide between India and China is one of territory, political systems, strategic outlook, and the disparate pace and direction of their development. They have divergent views of Asia.

Where China has economic and technological heft that India cannot yet match, India is intransigent about an Asian order with China at its head. Moreover, an older notion is still gaining political currency beneath it all: Asia in a sense beyond geography. Not in the way of some Bandung romanticism or talk of "Asian solidarity", the twenty-first century is hardly conducive to such things.

Rather, one sees the beginnings of a recognition, if of a kind that is less substantial, no less important, that the powers of Asia are of a piece in terms of the economic and technological change they are undergoing and their political agency. The geopolitical dimension is revealing: Power is shifting toward Asia, even if the United States remains essential to any balance there. It is material too.

Artificial intelligence, semiconductors, digital infrastructure, the shift in energy, manufacturing, and payment networks, and consumer markets of immense size are redefining the very nature of power. In short, Asia is where the future, in economic and technological terms, is being made and, at the same time, the main arena for geopolitical contestation. One finds evidence of such a consciousness in the exchange between Modi and Xi.

In putting forward his four propositions, Xi made the link explicit between bilateral stabilisation and the need for multilateral coordination and development. The two leaders agreed on expanding common ground in regional and global matters and working together in multilateral fora, with Xi noting the onus on the Global South's two most populous members. One need not read this warmth as a prelude to an India-China condominium or an alliance of Asians against the West; India would be ill-advised to countenance either.

Any Asian identity that has room for India has to be pluralist, not hierarchical, is what lends the present day its interest. India and China can appreciate how their own futures are bound up in the rise of Asia without having to concur on its political make-up. Hence, the New Delhi meeting is of note for neither the rosy view of a "reset" nor the foregone conclusion of rivalry.

A more basic truth is at play: Structures alter, and so do positions. India and China will compete, at times with vigor. Nonetheless, as technological and economic transformations accelerate and global power becomes more distributed, the two giants may realise that resolving their differences is a global necessity rather than a matter of balancing concessions and calculating interests.

Written by: Shibashis Chatterjee The writer is professor of International Relations at Jadavpur University
