Category: Editorial
Title: Can Tamil Nadus reforms change transgender Part Two

Can Tamil Nadu's reforms change transgender healthcare? | Explained

The 2019 Tamil Nadu Mental Health Care Policy and the 2025 State Policy for Transgender Persons further affirm healthcare, education, and property rights. Why does Tamil Nadu stand out? The study on Gender Guidance Clinics by the United Nations University-IIGH on Gender Guidance Clinics highlights how these developments are embedded in an enabling environment that has been created over decades in Tamil Nadu.

The state has consistently been a cradle for transformative social reforms, rooted in principles of self-respect and social equity, while actively confronting pervasive gender and caste discrimination. The acceptance of transgender identities is evident right from the annual Koovagam Kuthandavar festival held over centuries to the recent publication of the 2022 government gazette, which adopted respectful Tamil terms for sexual and gender-diverse persons. Despite political rivalries, both major political parties have championed numerous welfare initiatives to support the transgender community.

What challenges remain? While Tamil Nadu has set a benchmark for transgender-inclusive healthcare, challenges remain. GGCs must expand to provide comprehensive primary-to-tertiary care, publish a dedicated health manual, regularly build provider competencies and hold them accountable, regulate empanelled hospitals, progressively include mental health in benefit packages, establish grievance mechanisms, encourage research, and tackle societal bias through cross-sectoral action.

Engaging transgender communities at all stages of policy and implementation for transgender health is non-negotiable. Only sustained commitment and action can transform Tamil Nadu's promising model into lasting equity for transgender persons. (Rajalakshmi RamPrakash, PhD, is a global health researcher with a special interest in intersections of health policy systems and gender equity.

She is currently a Consultant with WHO (Geneva)-Human Reproduction Programme. Views are personal)
