Category: Editorial
Title: Cash is alive let it stay healthy Part Two

Cash is alive, let it stay healthy

This was not an isolated incident. Similar outages occurred in February 2021, June 2023, December 2024, and March this year. Cyberattacks are perhaps bigger threats than glitches. Multiple agencies and policy makers  -  VISA, the International Monetary Fund, and the US treasury  - have flagged the growing threat of cyberattacks targeted at payment systems; the ferocity of attacks is likely to increase as AI becomes more sophisticated.

The controversy in April this year over the ability of Anthropic's Mythos model was that it could potentially turbocharge cyberattacks on banking systems. Brazilian cybercrime group Plump Spider's repeated attacks on Brazil's instant payments system, Pix, operated by the central bank, is another cautionary tale. What are the implications of all this?

The future of financial regulation may not be defined solely by protecting the value or safety of money. It may increasingly be defined by ensuring uninterrupted access to it. Recognising access to money as an emerging dimension of systemic risk may therefore become one of the next important developments in financial regulation.

Three questions follow. First, should entities that have become systemically important access points to the nation's payment system be subject to stronger requirements relating to operational resilience, recovery planning, orderly exit arrangements, and continuity of public access? Second, instead of chasing digitalisation blindly, should policymakers devote greater attention to ensuring that cash continues to remain a viable and readily accessible fallback mechanism during periods of digital disruption?

The third and related question is whether fighting cash-access risk  -  the possibility that cash, despite being available in aggregate, is not readily accessible where and when citizens require it because of uneven distribution or weaknesses in the cash distribution network  -  should become an explicit target of financial stability policies. With the rapid growth of AI, it can be inferred that regulation will always stay behind the curve. That is certainly not a happy thought either for depositors, investors, or the regulator.

That said, the first step would be to recognise an emerging risk and weave it into the financial stability agenda. By Abheek Barua & Anil Katia, Barua is ex-chief economist, HDFC Bank, and Visiting Professor, Ashoka University; Katia is Director, Ducturus Advisory Services
