Category: Editorial
Title: Cash is alive let it stay healthy Part One

Cash is alive, let it stay healthy

Recognising access to money as an emerging dimension of systemic risk may be critical for regulation Complaints of ATMs going "dry" in many parts of the country have increased recently, with the bulk of the complaints coming from tier-II and -III cities. This has prompted the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to launch a nationwide review of currency distribution networks. Despite the growth of online transactions largely on the back of United Payments Interface (UPI), cash transactions still account for over 35% of all transactions in volume terms, although the lower average ticket size of these transactions reduces its share in value terms.

Cash is not dead, and every effort needs to be made to ensure that it remains healthy. The paucity of cash at distribution points can be a significant risk for the economy as a whole and the financial system. The issue is not whether sufficient currency exists in the economy. Rather, it is whether cash is available where and when citizens require it for their day-to-day transactions.

Access is key. The RBI has emphasised that there is no sign of a systemic crisis. However, its review underscores the central bank's growing concern about the access to currency rather than its overall quantity in the system, which has historically been its focus. One could argue that as digital payments grow further, the impact of these currency shortages should structurally decline.

One can envisage a scenario where cash may increasingly remain concentrated within banks, cash logistics networks, businesses, or households instead of circulating efficiently through the retail economy. As merchants rely more on digital payments, fewer of them would routinely maintain adequate cash balances, reducing cash availability within local communities. That seems like an inevitable consequence of a growing digital payments model, but leads to a somewhat worrying question.

What if digital payments platforms were hit by a shock? What kind of stability risks do these pose to the financial system and indeed the broader economy? A significant proportion of India's retail digital payments are increasingly routed through a small number of UPI third party application providers.

For millions of citizens, they have become the primary interface through which money is accessed and used. Importantly, these entities neither create money (through the credit multiplier process) nor hold deposits. The money continues to remain safely within the banking system. The question, then, is, what happens if a major payment access provider were to suffer a prolonged operational outage, cyber incident, business failure, or market exit?

The conventional approach to financial stability that central banks follow would not raise a red flag. Deposits would be safe, as would be the settlements infrastructure. Yet, millions of individuals and merchants could face significant disruption in accessing and using their money for routine economic activity.

Ironically enough, as cash usage declines with digitalisation, the traditional buffer of switching to cash transactions will weaken. This adds a new dimension to the notion of financial stability. As technology develops, the costs or the dark side of "technology" manifests in more sophisticated modes of cyberattacks.

Cyber frauds multiply, and the entire chain is compounded by the growing interdependence of payment systems. Interdependence means that a single glitch can amplify very quickly though the system. As recently as July 8, the US Federal Reserve suffered a major glitch in its payment systems  -  Fedwire, FedACH, and FedNow  -  disrupting trillions of dollars in daily transfers.
