Category: Editorial
Title: Climate farce

Climate farce

UN climate meets are not really headed anywhere UN climate summits are turning out to be more shambolic by the year, and the ongoing one at Belem, Brazil, promises to be no different. No more than a handful of these summits over three decades have been consequential. While immense scientific literature and data have been generated on the impacts of climate change and the factors contributing to it, efforts at a global scale to check greenhouse gas emissions have been underwhelming.

This is because the Global North, which has contributed historically to the existing stock of emissions, refuses to reduce emissions to levels required; nor does it put money on the table to enable the Global South transit to clean technologies. The latter argues that it needs more carbon space to raise living standards. Climate talks have remained gridlocked, as the North refuses to accept its responsibility.

It is time to get real and accept that this gridlock will not go. In fact, the economic and geo-political faultlines between the North and the South, and between resource rich countries (which include China with respect to critical minerals used in solar, wind and battery storage) and the rest have deepened. So, while the effects of climate change are already in our midst -  of horrific storms, floods and glacial melts ravaging livelihoods, property, lives and infrastructure  -  it is also clear as daylight that these jargon-ridden UN climate meets cannot rise to the occasion.

Far too much time has been lost in trying to rustle up funds multilaterally for the green transition, or to fund losses arising out of extreme weather events in the Global South. Yet, these meets bleat away about 'climate finance', creating one fund after another (Belem has carved out one for saving forests). With the US no longer a party in these talks, there will be fewer crumbs on the table.

Yet, 'climate finance' has generated its own gravy train of vested interests  -  of NGOs, consultants, bureaucrats and lobbyists in the green energy and fossil fuel space. They prepare reports that trot out eye-popping climate finance needs, running into trillions of dollars, with little to back up these sums. The task of arresting emissions should be taken out of these spaces and left to individual countries, entrepreneurs, civil society and financial institutions, public and private.

Fortunately, India has begun to work out its own climate finance and transition plan. The Securities and Exchange Board of India and the Reserve Bank of India have created frameworks for raising equity or debt funds for sustainable ventures. In developing this finance framework, it should be borne in mind that private capital will prefer funding projects with a good financial rate of return; this could leave out projects that have a longer gestation period or offer socio-economic spin-offs.

The government will have to step in with interest subventions and subsidies here. Clearly, blended finance is the way to go .
