Category: Editorial
Title: CRR can be used to provide liquidity Part Two

CRR can be used to provide liquidity

Fourth, forex swaps are now quite common where the RBI buys dollars from banks, say $5 billion, which effectively supplies around ₹45,000 crore. These swaps involve banks buying them back after a period which can be one or three years, or any duration the RBI chooses. This has been effective for sure.

There are, however, two considerations here. The first is that when dollars are sold, it can be disruptive, if there is currency volatility, too. The second is that when dollars have to be bought at maturity, liquidity conditions can be tight. In such a case the RBI may have to again provide liquidity through other measures.

Therefore, a lot of calibration is needed while mixing these measures. Not used thus far A measure which has not been used so far is the CRR. In 2006 the regulation which limited the CRR levels was done away with, and the discretion lies with the RBI. Meanwhile, the relevance of CRR has come down over time.

The fact is that no bank is ever allowed to fail in India and the credit goes to the RBI. Therefore, the case of using these CRR balances as a contingency for rescuing the bank is passe. In fact the US, the UK, Hong Kong, Canada, New Zealand, Australia do not have this reserve. The justification is that there are several regulations in place like capital adequacy, LCR, SLR, NSFR (net stable funding ratio) which control banking operations.

If this is in place, having the CRR can be debated, because this ratio came in when systems were rudimentary and the only reserve requirements were the CRR and SLR. The CRR does not earn any interest from the RBI. For the ₹250 lakh crore of deposits outstanding the average cost is, say, around 5 per cent.

The amount kept aside for CRR is 3 per cent of NDTL and that is about ₹7.5 lakh crore. The interest cost incurred is around ₹37,500 cr which is quite high. Lowering this reserve will also help banks to lower their lending rates without a prod from monetary policy. It will be worthwhile to consider the lowering the CRR to provide liquidity, along with other instruments.

By Madan Sabnavis The writer is Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda. Views are personal
