Category: Editorial
Title: Decoding banks return to health Part One

Decoding banks' return to health

Model of debt induced consumption led growth is not sustainable for long. It is subject to income shocks The banking landscape in 2025 is significantly different from what it was a decade ago. It is marked by consolidation of public sector banks and regional rural banks. New category of banks like small finance banks (SFBs) and payment banks (PBs) were licensed so as to deepen financial inclusion.

Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) added a transformative layer for distribution of financial services. Twelve operative SFBs account for only1.4 per cent of the commercial banks' business. PBs' business model is narrower than what is considered as narrow banking. They are not permitted to lend and can accept deposits only up to a maximum of ₹2 lakh per customer and that too only as savings or current account.

The PBs deployed nearly a million business correspondents to serve in the villages. Many experts question the relevance and viability of PBs, given the huge success of UPI. Not surprisingly PBs aspire to become SFBs and the latter aspire to graduate to universal banks to improve profitability. Emergence of fintechs, DPI DPI democratised access to finance with private sector innovation on the top of public infra.

UPI is the most visible and impactful innovation in recent times and this real time mobile payment system clocked over 220 billion transactions. Aadhaar enabled payment system (Aeps) provided digital assisted payment system to over 95 per cent of six lakh villages through micro ATMs. Open Credit Enabled Network (OCEN), Account Aggregators (AAs), Unified Lending Interface (ULI), fintechs, over thousand lending apps, and UPI have created a new digital ecosystem for small ticket loans.

Loans are available at the push of a button in minutes and seconds. But speed at the cost of underwriting quality creates stress in loan portfolios and also over-leverage by small borrowers. The aggregate net profit of commercial banks increased 14-fold to ₹3.7 lakh crore in 2025. There is an all-round improvement in the various financial parameters such as Return on Assets, NPAs and Capital Adequacy Ratio (see Table 1) Critical issues Government's infusion of growth and regulatory capital of about ₹3 lakh crore, and resolution of NPAs helped achieve this turnaround.

This turnaround notwithstanding, some critical issues need attention to sustain growth, stability and inclusion and these are discussed below. Declining share of bank deposits: The share of bank deposits in the household financial savings has been on the decline from 41 per cent in 2016 to 35 per cent in 2025. The share of market linked products like equity, mutual funds has shown significant increase from less than 1 per cent in 2016 to nearly 15.5 per cent in 2025.

It is claimed that while aggregate saving may not be a function of interest rate, its distribution among different forms may be influenced by interest rate. Policymakers need to keep this in mind while deciding on the level of interest rate and fiscal incentives. It is important to note that loans create deposits which remain in the system.

But expansion of credit is constrained by capital adequacy and reserve requirements. There is a difference between the macro conception of deposit growth and micro conception of deposit growth that is from the point of view of banks. While overall deposit growth is influenced by reserve money creation and reserve requirement, banks need to pay a close look at fixed deposit growth which is influenced by interest rate.
