Category: Editorial
Title: Decoding banks return to health Part Two

Decoding banks' return to health

Alignment of credit growth rate to nominal GDP growth rate: Credit growth rate far in excess of expected nominal GDP growth rate is not sustainable and even counterproductive leading to high level of NPAs. The unsavoury experience of the decade ending 2015, bears this out. A couple of years ago, the authors in an Op-ed had argued that credit growth rate should be close to nominal GDP growth rate.

RBI Governor Malhotra in a recent interview echoed a similar view and dismissed suggestion of 2X credit growth as normal. The Governor further added that RBI does not specify any credit growth rate. But in our view, RBI may signal comfortable credit growth rate range along with projections of GDP and inflation numbers.

Allocative inefficiency: While the aggregate credit grew by only 206 per cent in the decade 2015-25, personal sector credit grew by a whopping 370 per cent. Infrastructure credit grew by 30 per cent and the large industry grew by a measly 28 per cent. The share of personal loans had significantly gone up from 20 per cent in 2015 to over 33 per cent and that of large corporates went down from 20 per cent to 15 per cent in 2025.

Even in absolute terms personal loans are very high at ₹62 lakh crore, and with NBFC exposure of ₹16 lakh crore aggregating to ₹78 lakh crore. Loans to industry at ₹41 lakh crore are far lower (Table 2). This model of debt induced consumption led growth is not sustainable for long. These are also subject to income shocks.

Loan is no substitute for incomes and wages. There are already signs of stress in this sector. Flow of credit to productive and manufacturing purpose deserves more attention. Housing loans which account for 50 per cent of personal segment need a reality check, though they are classified as secured. An IBA report indicates that over four lakh dwelling units are stressed and there are long delays in completion of these projects with potential credit losses.

Many a banking crisis including 2008 Global Financial Crisis had its origins in excessive lending to this sector. Besides it may create asset price bubbles. Lenders need to revisit the mortgage models for large complexes. (This is the first of a two-part article) By C Rangarajan & B Sambamurthy Rangarajan is former Chairman of the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister and former Governor, Reserve Bank of India.

Sambamurthy is formerly Director and CEO, IDRBT and led a commercial bank. Views are personal
