Category: Editorial
Title: Dollar deluge options for liquidity Part One

Dollar deluge: options for liquidity management

Absorbing such a large surplus involves trade-offs. As every instrument used has a cost, the choice must be of the one that is easier to absorb India's external current account deficit (CAD) remains manageable. However, net capital inflows dried up during the last two years, resulting in the RBI losing foreign exchange reserves.

The problem was compounded by the US-Iran war since February 28, 2026. Short-term initiatives by the government and the RBI, including reduction of special excise duties on petrol and diesel, liberalisation of external commercial borrowings (ECBs), reduction of net open position by authorised dealers (ADs) and interventions in the forex market, were not enough to arrest the rupee's depreciation. Both the RBI and government announced a slew of measures on June 5, for further liberalisation of capital account transactions, including limited period offer for dollar mobilisation under special swap schemes.

The RBI made the swap schemes attractive for banks to raise fresh FCNR(B) deposits and swap the foreign currency with the RBI for rupees on a fully hedged basis. Moreover, the RBI exempted these deposits from CRR, SLR, PSL requirements, removed the interest rate ceiling and allowed leveraging against primary dollar deposits, which enabled banks to offer better rates to NRIs. The RBI wanted dollars.

It got so much that it closed its special FCNR(B) swap window a month ahead of the original deadline. By August 31, banks reported $136.37 billion in forex inflows under the dollar-rupee forex swap facility, of which $127.23 billion came through FCNR(B) deposits. The experiment was highly successful, surpassing all previous such attempts.

The rationale for the dollar hunt was straightforward. A stronger foreign-exchange position gives the RBI more room to deal with pressure on the rupee and provides a cushion against external shocks. Foreign portfolio flows can be volatile, while other stable sources of foreign capital were not coming in quickly enough.

FCNR(B) deposits offered a relatively quick way to bring in foreign currency, although at a cost. After the swap The more interesting part of the story begins after the swap. The dollars went to the RBI, and equivalent rupees credited to banks. Those rupees can be lent, invested, and used to repay liabilities with a time lag or can be simply parked with the RBI.

The RBI data showed a net liquidity absorption of around ₹11 trillion through its LAF window on September 15, 2026. The RBI's dollar deluge has, rather unexpectedly, created another challenge, managing excess liquidity that came with it. The scale makes the problem harder to ignore. The question is no longer simply whether the RBI should absorb the liquidity.

It is how much to absorb, for how long and through which instrument. The RBI has several options, but each comes with its own trade-offs. The variable rate reverse repo (VRRR) is the most straightforward short-term tool that aligns well with the policy rate. It absorbs surplus funds for a specified period without permanently changing banks' balance sheets.

That makes it useful when liquidity is temporary. If the surplus persists, the RBI will have to keep on rolling over the huge amount under short term VRRR operations. The RBI also went for long term VRRR, but there was a lukewarm response from banks. Standing deposit facility (SDF) gives banks a safe place to park excess cash with the RBI, but at 25 basis points below the repo rate.
