Category: Editorial
Title: Donald Trump shakes up the global nuclear Part Two

Donald Trump shakes up the global nuclear order

Among the necessary ratifications, the U.S., China, Israel, Egypt, and Iran have not done so, Russia did and withdrew its ratification in 2023, and India, Pakistan and North Korea have neither signed nor ratified it. India and Pakistan tested in 1998 and have since observed a voluntary moratorium, and North Korea conducted six tests between 2006 and 2017. Given today's geopolitics, the prospects for the CTBT entering into force appear bleak.

Second, the CTBT obliges states "not to carry out any nuclear weapon test explosion or any other nuclear explosion". The U.S. was opposed to defining the terms, and instead, worked out private understandings with Russia and China on 'zero-yield-tests'; this permitted hydro-nuclear tests that do not produce a self-sustaining supercritical chain reaction.

The U.S. had conducted over a thousand nuclear tests and Russia 727 tests, giving them an adequate data base. China, with only 47 tests, also went along with this understanding. Thus, the CTBT delegitimised only nuclear-explosive testing, not nuclear weapons, the reason why India never joined it. In 2019-20, the U.S.

State Department assessed that Russia and China "may have conducted low yield nuclear tests in a manner inconsistent with the U.S. zero-yield standard" though this was negated by the CTBT organisation that declared that their monitoring network with over 300 monitoring stations spread over 89 countries had not detected any inconsistent activity. In a TV interview on November 2, Mr.

Trump doubled down on resuming nuclear testing, this time including Pakistan and North Korea among the countries testing. A clarification came the same day from U.S. Secretary of Energy Chris Wright on Fox News, calling the U.S. tests 'systems-tests'. "These are not nuclear explosions. These are what we call noncritical explosions," he said.

However, Mr. Trump's intention remains unclear. The new low-yield warheads being designed make them more usable and the new systems (hypersonics, cruise and unmanned systems) are dual capable systems, leading to renewed research for missile defences such as the U.S. 'golden dome'. Meanwhile, doctrinal changes are being considered to cope with new technological developments in cyber and space domains.

This raises doubts about the nuclear taboo in the coming decades. The sole surviving U.S.-Russia arms control agreement, the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (New START) that limits the U.S. and Russian strategic forces to 700 launchers and 1,550 warheads is due to expire on February 4, 2026 with no prospects of any talks on the horizon.

China is not a party to any arms control and its nuclear arsenal that had remained below 300, is undergoing a rapid expansion, estimated at 600 today, and likely to exceed 1,000 by 2030. An incipient nuclear arms race was already underway; a resumption of explosive testing will just take the lid off. Russia and China have denied Mr.

Trump's allegations regarding clandestine tests, but will follow if the U.S. resumes explosive testing. China will be the biggest beneficiary because with only 47 tests (compared to over 1,000 by the U.S.), resumed tests will help it to validate new designs and accumulate data. India has been observing a voluntary moratorium.

But if explosive testing resumes, India will certainly resume testing to validate its boosted fission and thermonuclear designs, tested only once in 1998. Undoubtedly, Pakistan will follow but given its growing strategic linkages with China witnessed during Operation Sindoor, this need hardly adds to India's concerns. Though the CTBT is not in force, it did create a norm.
