Category: Editorial
Title: Donald Trump shakes up the global nuclear Part One

Donald Trump shakes up the global nuclear order

The United States has shaped the global nuclear order and it would be ironic if its President's actions now become the catalyst for its demise Today, the global nuclear order offers a curious contradiction - since the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, nuclear weapons have not been used during the last 80 years. The global nuclear arsenals have come down from a high of 65,000 bombs in late 1970s to less than 12,500 today. And, despite concerns in the 1960s that by 1980, there may be at least two dozen states with nuclear weapons, the total today remains nine - five (the United States, Russia, the United Kingdom, France and China) are permanent members of the United Nations Security Council who had tested before the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) came into being while four more developed their nuclear arsenals later (Israel, Pakistan, India and North Korea).

Looking back, these would seem to be impressive achievements but nobody is celebrating. In fact, the prevailing sentiment is that the global nuclear order is under strain and the recent announcements by U.S. President Donald Trump may weaken all three elements of the global nuclear order. Resumption of 'nuclear tests' On October 30, 2025, on his way to a meeting with China's President Xi Jinping in Busan, Mr.

Trump announced on Truth Social, "Because of other countries testing programs, I have instructed the Department of War to start testing our Nuclear Weapons on an equal basis. That process will begin immediately." He added, "Russia is second, China is a distant third, but will be even within 5 years." While it was clear that the message was directed at Russia and China, it was unclear whether Mr. Trump was referring to 'nuclear explosive testing' or the testing of nuclear weapon systems.

Second, the nuclear labs (Los Alamos, Lawrence Livermore, and Sandia) and the Nevada testing facilities fall under the Department of Energy and not the Department of War. It is no secret that China, Russia, and the U.S. are designing and developing new nuclear weapons. In late October, Russia tested a nuclear-powered cruise missile (Burevestnik) that travelled 14,000 kilometres, following a week later, with a test of an underwater nuclear-powered torpedo (Poseidon).

China has been testing hypersonic missiles and, in 2021, tested a nuclear capable hypersonic glide vehicle carried on a rocket, capable of orbiting the earth before approaching its target from an unexpected direction that was passed off as a satellite launcher. The U.S. is producing new warheads  -  a variable yield B61-13 gravity bomb, a low yield W76-2 warhead for the Trident II D-5 missile, while working on a new nuclear armed submarine launched cruise missile.

Yet, they have refrained from explosive testing. Russia's last explosive test was in 1990 while the U.S. declared a moratorium on tests in 1992. In 1993, the U.S. created a Stockpile Stewardship and Management Programme under the National Nuclear Security Administration to work on warhead modernisation, life extension and development of new safety protocols in warhead design.

U.S. President Bill Clinton also took the lead in pushing negotiations in Geneva for a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). China and France concluded their tests in 1996, six months before the negotiations ended. Why the CTBT lacks a definition Twenty-nine years later, the CTBT has not entered into force despite 187 countries signing it.
