Category: Editorial
Title: Dry monsoon may not spike food inflation Part Two

Dry monsoon may not spike food inflation

Pulses, bajra, maize, and groundnut have seen a 5-7% increase in coverage between 2013-14 and 2023-24, whereas soya bean coverage increased over 37% from low levels. This structural evolution finds support in empirical research. A 2023 RBI Bulletin study reported a non-linear relationship between southwest monsoon rainfall and inflation  -  even after controlling for agricultural growth  - suggesting that rainfall alone is no longer a sufficient predictor of price pressures.

Against this backdrop, while weak monsoon in fiscal 2027 will adversely impact agricultural production, it cannot be a definite predictor of high food inflation. Rainfall forecasts point to a monsoon that could finish ~10% below normal. Rainfall in June was ~40% deficient  -  the weakest start since 2014  -  and sowing at the end of June lagged on-year levels, particularly for oilseeds, pulses, and cereals.

Aggregate seasonal rainfall may be a less reliable predictor of inflation today but the timing of rainfall could still matter. Since 2012, food inflation has remained above trend in five of the eight years amid deficient June rainfall. Early-season rainfall shortfalls can affect sowing decisions, acreage, crop expectations, and even policy responses, with implications that persist even when monsoon performance improves later in the season.

This suggests that monitoring intra-seasonal rainfall may be just as important as tracking cumulative rainfall. At the same time, policy buffers remain strong. As of May-end, rice and wheat stocks in the central pool remained far above the prescribed buffer norms, while measures such as extending duty-free imports of tur until March 2027 should help ease supply pressures.

However, not all food categories are equally protected. Horticulture and poultry products could still face inflationary pressures, if above-normal temperatures and heatwave conditions, as forecast by the India Meteorological Department, affect yields and production costs. Similarly, higher global prices could keep edible oil inflation elevated.

The broader conclusion, however, is unmistakable. Weak monsoons continue to pose a meaningful risk to agricultural growth. But unlike in previous decades, they no longer offer a definitive road map for food inflation. By Dipti Deshpande & Bhavi Shah, Respectively Principal Economist and Junior Economist, Crisil
