Category: Editorial
Title: Economy may survive war supply shocks Part One

Economy may survive war supply shocks

The rupee and stock markets will remain volatile, but impact on growth and inflation may remain muted The current oil crisis is the fourth in the last four years. The first episode took place when Russia invaded Ukraine which saw crude price moving from around $84/barrel in February 2022 to $117 in March and remaining in a higher range till September, when it moderated to $90/barrel before reverting to around $80/barrel in December. Therefore, the higher prices lasted for almost nine months.

In this episode, Russia was a major supplier of oil (third largest with share of 10-12 per cent). With a ban being imposed on imports by the western community, supplies were disrupted. The second was the Israel-Palestine conflict in October 2023 but its price impact lasted for just about a month. This is because no oil producing country was involved in this conflict.

The third was a short lived war where the US and Israel attacked Iran in June 2025. Here too, the price impact was limited as Iran is not really a major supplier of oil to the world, with its share in global output at around 4 per cent and sanctions still in place. The present war is different. To begin with, almost all the oil producing countries in West Asia are embroiled in this conflict, impacting production of oil and gas.

Further, while Iran has not officially closed the Strait of Hormuz, ships will not sail through this passage, given the risks involved. So, there has been greater disruption to the oil industry with shipping costs also going up for all goods passing this region. Significantly, an early end to the war looks unlikely.

Ukraine has managed to hold on for four years now. Impact on India India imports around five million barrels a day which works out to around $180 billion (1.8 billion barrels annually) a year. Hence, if the price remains high for the entire year, for every $10 dollar increase in the price of oil, the import bill be up by $18 billion.

This can lead to an increase in current account deficit by 0.5 per cent of GDP, which should not be a serious issue for India as the balance is fairly comfortable today in the region of 1-1.5 per cent. Exports, however, would be impacted as petro-products are around $65-70 billion per annum, of which 15 per cent is headed to these vulnerable regions. The immediate impact has been felt on the currency with the rupee crossing the psychological level of ₹92/$.

It is likely to see increased volatility. This market will witness increased volatility. First, the US dollar will also be volatile with a possible tendency to strengthen. The Fed will hold the reins here. Second, any news on oil and gas supply disruption will spook the rupee. Third, FPI flows will remain uncertain.

While the India growth story will bring in the funds, the rupee volatility will lower potential returns. This can be a deterrent. Fourth, the behaviour of exporters and importers will also hold a clue. In times of uncertainty, exporters hold back earnings, while importers may rush in to buy dollars, exacerbating the demand-supply situation.

Lastly, RBI action in the coming days will be important as intervention in the market can quell speculative forces and bring in stability. Limited growth impact Concerns over growth may be less serious. While supply disruptions will cause problems to user industries such as fertilizers, chemical products among others, a decline in exports can also dent growth in GDP at the margin.
