Category: Editorial
Title: Economy may survive war supply shocks Part Two

Economy may survive war supply shocks

The overall impact may not be more than 0.1-0.2 percentage points but would need monitoring for secondary effects of the war. The supply disruptions of gas and their impact on user industries will be more of an issue. Inflation is likely to be under control unless the government decides to pass on the higher price of crude to the consumer, which has rarely happened.

When crude prices stayed low, the benefit did not go the consumer but to the OMCs. Higher crude prices may not hence lead to an increase in retail prices in the near future as this can be absorbed by the OMCs. In fact, given the fragile global oil situation over the last four years, it may make sense to transfer all future surpluses to an emergency fund that can be used in times of crisis.

Further, OMCs do buy oil based on contracts struck with suppliers where the price formula is worked out in advance. Therefore, the increase seen today in the market may not be the price which is finally paid and would be lower. Also, hedging practices are pursued to cover for price risk to an extent.

The government would be monitoring the situation carefully. There are a few issues that merit attention. The first is whether anything can be done on excise duty or VAT (by States)if prices rise further. Second, the subsidy element is low today on LPG which is not an issue. In fact, the price has been increased recently to partly offset the higher cost.

But supplies are a concern on which a policy has already been indicated to ensure that essential services are not affected. Third, fertilizer prices need to be watched carefully as they affect the subsidy level as well its availability. The stock market would continue to display yo-yo movements reflecting sentiment on a real time basis and hence will be hard to predict in the short run.

This will be the case with global indices, too. Last, the bond market has not been affected much. While forex intervention will draw out liquidity, the RBI has already announced OMOs which will be reassuring for the market. Therefore, the length of the war will hold the clue to the final outcome. The government and RBI are seized of the matter and would take the appropriate steps to mitigate the risks.

But markets for sure, will remain volatile. By Madan Sabnavis The writer is Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda. Views expressed are personal
