Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 23

Force of ideas: On the New Orleans truck attack 
The Islamic State must not be allowed to regain foothold in West Asia 
The truck attack in the French Quarter of New Orleans, on New Year's Day, killing at least 15 
people and wounding 30, suggests that the threat of low-tech, lone wolf attacks has not 
gone away. The attacker, identified as 42-year-old Shamsud-Din Jabbar, an American 
citizen who had served in the military, was killed in a shoot-out. Police found an Islamic 
State (IS) flag and explosives in his truck. Just hours earlier, Jabbar had posted videos on 
social media, indicating that he was inspired by the IS. In recent months, the IS, a terrorist organisation 
founded in Iraq and Syria, and now present across geographies, has released propaganda videos 
asking its "soldiers" to strike during celebrations in western cities in the holiday season. A few hours after 
the New Orleans attack, a Tesla Cyber truck exploded in front of the Trump International Hotel in Las 
Vegas, killing at least one person and injuring several. Police later said Jabbar, the suspected New 
Orleans attacker, did not act alone, and are investigating any potential link between the truck attack and 
the cyber truck explosion. 
The IS, which lost its physical Caliphate in Iraq and Syria, has been trying to revive its lost fortunes. The 
terror group survived as an insurgency, shifted its centre of operations to Afghanistan (Islamic State-
Khorasan), where it carries out attacks, targeting the country's Shia minority, and opened new networks 
in Africa. When the IS was at its peak in 2014-15, it had successfully globalized terror - any 
sympathizer could hold the IS flag, declare loyalty to the 'Caliph' and unleash attacks against the 
"infidels". World cities, from Dhaka to Orlando and Istanbul to Belgium, witnessed dozens of IS-
inspired attacks. These have ebbed, partly due to the destruction of the IS 'caliphate' and partly due to 
enhanced security measures and deradicalization programmes. But now that Syria is in transition 
following the fall of the Bashar al-Assad regime, the IS is trying to rebuild itself. Kurdish fighters in 
Syria's east, who played a pivotal role in defeating the Islamists in 2015-16, say IS militants have looted 
government weapons' depots and are preparing for a comeback. The New Orleans attack should serve 
as a warning signal for the U.S. The IS should not be allowed to regain a foothold in conflict-ridden 
West Asia. Besides, the U.S. should also get to the roots of the radicalization of American citizens and 
counter it. Organizations such as the IS should be fought with both force and ideas.


Losing momentum: On slowing consumption demand 
GST receipts and other recent indicators suggest consumption is still a concern 
everal economic indicators released over the past week are bad news for the Finance Ministry 
and Reserve Bank of India's hopes of a growth rebound in the second half of 2024-25 - at 
least for the October-December quarter. While GDP growth slipping to 5.4% in the second 
quarter was termed a transient blip, policymakers have acknowledged slowing consumption 
demand led by restrained spending trends in urban India. They have also exuded optimism 
about a festive boost from cities along with a resilient rural demand outlook lifting the 
momentum. The latest data points are also important as they are part of the final gauges for the Finance 
Ministry to assess before it finalizes its economic blueprint for 2025-26 in the February 1 Union Budget. 
Bank credit growth has slowed for the fifth straight month in November, while core infrastructure sectors 
- about 40% of industrial output - expanded at a four-month high pace of 4.3%. However, production 
levels were 3.3% below October with six of eight sectors operating at lower capacities. The Purchasing 
Managers' Index shows factory activity levels through November and December were the worst through 
2024, even as input cost inflation spurred price hikes that would hit demand somewhat over time. 
The Goods and Services Tax (GST) receipts for December, based on transactions concluded in 
November, do not have much succour to offer either, especially on the consumption engine of the 
economy. Gross revenues were at a three-month low of almost ₹1.77 lakh crore, and just 7.3% higher 
than last year, marking the joint-second slowest uptick in three and a half years. December's revenues, 
in fact, mark the fourth straight month of below-10% growth, with the pace decelerating every passing 
month, and the year-to-date rise in revenues is now just 8.6%, making the 11% growth estimate in the 
Budget a tall task to catch up with in the final quarter. Net revenues after refunds were just 3.3%, the 
slowest this fiscal, although this may partly be explained by high refund payouts in December. Revenue 
growth from domestic transactions slowed to 8.4%, while import revenues grew just 3.9% - the former 
may perhaps be linked to tighter retail credit flows and a post-Deepavali spending pullback, but the latter 
is a tad puzzling as November's goods import bill had shot up 27% to a record high of $70 billion. The 
poor revenue growth rates for major consumer States such as Uttar Pradesh (1%) and Gujarat (4%), and 
the persistent contraction in Andhra Pradesh and a few northeastern States (including Manipur), also 
need closer scrutiny. For the Budget's formulation, the Centre would do well to try to understand and 
address the pain points afflicting consumption, including high inflation.