Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 107

Assuaging concerns: On India and ethanol-blended fuel 
Vehicle owners deserve support on use of ethanol-blended fuel 
The downsides to ethanol use when compared to petrol are well known, including in the U.S. 
and Brazil, that have led in ethanol blending. But the engineering behind the safe and 
efficient use of ethanol-blended petrol, from 5% to 100%, is established too. Ethanol blending 
began as a response to the oil shock of the 1970s. Ethanol has also been pushed as carbon 
neutral. For India, however, the clinching argument is import substitution and lower price. The 
government's case is that ethanol blending up to 20% can ensure $10 billion being put in Indian pockets 
every year. But, the benefits will be uneven for farmers, traders and distillers. India's case hinges on 
increasing use of C-heavy molasses that are not used for sugar making, using broken rice that otherwise 
rots in godowns, and on ramping up acreage and productivity of maize that is agriculturally less 
demanding. These are supposed to set off food security concerns. Once the ethanol economy is fully 
established, however, it may be tough to prioritise food stocks over the interests of stakeholders in case 
of shortages and imbalances. Import substitution figures can be dented by import of farm inputs such as 
fertilizers that have a forex outgo of $10 billion. 
Ethanol has an efficiency penalty - it can affect material durability and corrode fuel handling systems. 
But, global studies have shown that vehicles manufactured as per Euro 2, U.S. Tier 1 and India's BS 2 
norms (in force since 2001) are compatible for ethanol use up to E15. The closed loop fuel control 
systems mandated to control fuel burning and keeping emissions down in BS 2 can help to mitigate 
efficiency and durability penalties of ethanol and the upgraded materials in BS 2 can help to reduce 
corrosion. In addition, as per norms, India's vehicles sold since 2023 are committed to handle up to E20 
although questions arise over the impact on the mass of older vehicles. And what is not helping is that in 
India there is no choice for consumers. Also, any reduction in price claimed earlier does not seem to be 
reflected in the bunk. Meanwhile, India has adopted two ethanol-specific norms and is expected to come 
up with E27, taking a cue from Brazil. While the government insists that its research indicates no harm, 
what would really help is full disclosure by automakers on their past brands even as they are announcing 
models that can accept any level of ethanol. For instance, some models sold some five years ago 
accepted only E5. Manufacturers should indicate possible mitigation routes for such models. And the 
government must back insurance claims. Transparency should support policy moves. 
T


New start: on the Alaska summit and the Ukraine war 
Ukraine's security concerns must be addressed for lasting peace 
The much-anticipated summit between U.S. President Donald Trump and his Russian 
counterpart Vladimir Putin in Anchorage, Alaska, did not yield a breakthrough on the Ukraine 
war but appeared to narrow the gaps between their positions on how to end the conflict. While 
Ukraine was the most contentious issue on the agenda, the summit was significant for 
several reasons. Relations between the world's two largest nuclear powers have been 
defined by hostility and mutual distrust. A stable, predictable relationship and the prospect of a new 
arms control pact - hinted at by Mr. Putin - are critical not just for stability in Eastern Europe but also 
for broader global stability. Yet, rebuilding Russo-American ties is inconceivable without peace in 
Ukraine. All sides in the Ukraine war publicly claim that they are committed to peace, but they differ 
sharply on how to achieve it. Ukraine and its European partners have called for an immediate ceasefire, 
a demand reiterated by Mr. Trump before meeting Mr. Putin. Russia has resisted calls for a ceasefire, 
insisting instead on a comprehensive peace agreement that addresses what Mr. Putin calls the conflict's 
"root causes". Mr. Trump appeared to endorse the Russian line when he said "the best way to end the 
horrific war" is to go directly to a peace agreement. 
While the downside of the summit was its failure to deliver a breakthrough, the positive side is that it 
opened a diplomatic path that could lead to conflict resolution. Mr. Trump, who claimed that he and Mr. 
Putin agreed on "many points", spoke with European, NATO and Ukrainian leaders after the meeting. 
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy is expected to visit the White House on Monday to discuss Mr. 
Putin's proposal. Mr. Trump also suggested that it is now "up to Zelenskyy" to strike a deal with Russia, 
"a very big power". Russia has consistently made three core demands to end the war - recognition for 
the Ukrainian territories it has annexed and Ukraine's "neutrality" and "demilitarization". Post-summit 
reports suggest that Mr. Putin is open to freezing the war along the frontlines in the south (Zaporizhzhia 
and Kherson) provided Russia retains full control of Donbas (Donetsk and Luhansk). A settlement 
could also involve Russian withdrawal in the northeast (Kharkiv). Ukraine has so far said that it would not 
concede land for peace. The challenge before Mr. Trump is to sustain the talks aimed at narrowing the 
differences further to reach a workable compromise. While it makes perfect sense to end the war on 
practical terms, Mr. Trump should not impose an agreement on Kyiv. Peace would prevail in Eastern 
Europe only if Ukraine's security concerns are addressed and it is provided with credible assurances 
that Russia would not invade it again. 
T