Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 94

English dreams: On language debate and English medium education 
Imposing any language as the medium of instruction is unacceptable 
nglish medium education is an aspiration for many Indians, but state policy regarding the 
medium of instruction has been uneven across time and regions. The ongoing language 
debate in India, which stems from the renewed efforts of the Bharatiya Janata Party to enforce 
a three-language policy, has many components, the medium of instruction being one. 
Educationists generally argue that instruction in the mother tongue helps children achieve 
better learning goals in their early stages of development. This view is supported by pedagogical 
research, but it cannot, and does not, operate in isolation from other factors such as constitutional 
rights and ground realities. India's linguistic diversity and distribution is such that even the question of 
what is a child's mother tongue can often be a contested one. There is also the constitutional question 
of freedom of expression and choice. In 2014, after a protracted legal tussle, the Supreme Court of 
India held that a Karnataka government order of 1994 that made instruction in Kannada mandatory until 
Class four was not valid under the Constitution. For, children have a right to choose, and the state 
cannot enforce its view on what is good for them. The rights of private educational institutions to offer 
education as per market demand is another related issue. 
The National Education Policy that is being aggressively pushed by the Centre has a particularly anti-
English edge, which is not in line with popular aspiration. Many States that want to promote their local 
language and culture also want to promote English education and English as a medium of instruction. In 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Tamil Nadu, there are aided English medium schools. The 
demand for English medium education is growing - this includes the Hindi-speaking regions - which 
is met largely by substandard and expensive private institutions. English skills help individuals and the 
country in gaining a place in the global services sector. India's subaltern caste groups in particular seek 
to empower themselves through English education, which remains a currency for upward mobility. If 
state schools do not offer English medium instruction, relatively richer families could still access it 
through private schools. In this context, education becomes a continuing reproduction and even 
aggravation of social inequalities, which is the exact opposite of its purpose. The fact is that knowledge 
of English is empowering and convertible for other outcomes. There can be a debate on whether it 
should be the medium of instruction at the primary level, but a basic test of any policy is in how it 
advances the ambitions of the most disadvantaged sections. 
E


Bridge too far: On the bridge collapse in Vadodara 
A regular audit of all major infrastructure projects is a must 
In July 9, 2025, a span of a 40-year-old bridge in Vadodara in Gujarat caved in, sending 
half-a-dozen vehicles into the Mahisagar river below. On Thursday (July 10, 2025), 18 
people were confirmed dead. Chief Minister Bhupendra Patel has ordered an investigation 
into the cause, which locals have alleged to be the long-standing neglect by local 
authorities. On June 15, 2025, an iron pedestrian bridge over the Indrayani River in Pune 
district collapsed due to overloading, leaving four dead. In May, a concrete slab being 
hoisted by a crane at the site of the construction of a bridge over the Kathajodi river in 
Cuttack fell on workers below, killing three. Similarly, in 2024, the Ghatkopar hoarding collapse in 
Mumbai resulted in 17 fatalities. And in 2023, there were more accidents - a girder failure at an under-
construction railway bridge in Mizoram left 26 workers dead; a rooftop billboard collapse killed two 
women in Lucknow; and a pillar collapse at a metro construction site in Bengaluru killed a mother and 
her toddler. In 2022, the Morbi suspension bridge over the Machchhu river, again in Gujarat, failed, 
killing more than 140 people. These are only some of the hundreds of incidents involving the 
catastrophic failure of public infrastructure. They are accompanied by road accidents and deadly fires in 
crowded areas, both of which regularly claim many lives. 
Even if they are isolated, they are not entirely accidental: they are symptoms of India's ageing 
infrastructure that is being tested, especially in peri-urban areas, as industrial growth and urban 
populations expand. Facilities such as bridges, roads and hospitals that were designed for some 
number of users, are progressively giving way under the weight of more. So also are the departments 
responsible for their upkeep, many of which remain underfunded, understaffed or complacent. While 
the authorities have ordered investigations into these incidents, few have yielded failure analysis reports 
into the public domain. Some also prompted audits but they were restricted to infrastructure of the same 
type. Given the evident ubiquity of the problem, India must modify asset-creating initiatives such as the 
Urban Infrastructure Development Fund to have additional priorities and adjust the incentives of 
rehabilitative schemes such as the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation to help 
regularly maintain ageing urban assets in all centres, with greater frequency in those peopled by 10 lakh 
or more. Second, while baseline audit frameworks for municipal bridges exist, they must be enforced 
more uniformly and transparently. Finally, until then, accidents must trigger a probe by a statutory body 
plus a mandatory audit of all major infrastructure, and States must endeavour to publish the findings at 
the earliest. 
O