Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 88

Failed summit: on the G-7 summit in Canada 
India must reassess the usefulness of attending G-7 meetings 
It 50, the G-7 - a grouping of the most advanced economies - should appear robust, 
cohesive and experienced in managing global conflict. Instead, the G-7 Summit and 
Outreach session in Kananaskis, Canada presented a disunited and ineffective force in the 
face of some of the most testing conflicts including an escalating Russia-Ukraine war, the 
Israel-Iran strife and Israel's ceaseless bombardment of Gaza. In addition, it has been 
unable to deal with the biggest disruptor in global trade - that of the U.S. Trump 
administration's reciprocal tariffs worldwide. This year's G-7 was rocky from the start as host 
Canada saw an unexpected election just months before the summit. The government of Mark Carney 
was still finding its feet, which meant leaders such as Prime Minister Modi were invited just days before 
the summit. Upheavals in U.S. foreign and trade policy have also caught the grouping off-guard: U.S. 
President Donald Trump's pivot to Russia on the Ukraine crisis, and ambiguous approach to China have 
been particularly noted. In Kananaskis Mr. Trump even suggested that the G-7 become the "G9, 
including Russia and China", much to the chagrin of other leaders, including the Ukraine President, who 
was a special invitee. Mr. Trump's volte face from proclaiming to be a "Peace-time President" to actively 
supporting Israel's aggression was another issue. The U.S. refused to sign on to a draft statement by G-
7 members that called for a de-escalation or any criticism of Israel, and pushed for a statement that 
condemned Iran. Mr. Trump's early exit dealt another blow. Eventually, the G-7 was unable to issue a 
joint statement on key issues, and a Chair's Summary was issued to deal with the crises at hand, along 
with statements on less divisive issues such as AI and quantum computing, critical minerals supply 
chains, wildfire and prevention, and transnational repression, but not on terrorism, as India had hoped. 
Perhaps the most productive part of Mr. Modi's trip was his meeting with Mr. Carney, and the decisions 
to restore Indian and Canadian High Commissioners, and to reset ties ruptured over the Nijjar case. 
However, the Carney government has not demonstrated any change in its position on the case or on 
action against Khalistani extremism. Moreover, the G-7 statement on Transnational Repression (TNR) 
does not name any country, but is pointed in its reference to allegations of foreign interference and TNR 
made by Canada against India, as well as China, Russia and Iran. Given the outcomes, the government 
must review the utility of India's participation in the G-7 process. To have the Prime Minister travel more 
than 11,000 kilometres to address one outreach session of a fractious summit may not be the most 
optimal use of India's resources. 
A


One idea, many images 
Governors should not play up divisive images in official functions 
erala Governor Rajendra Vishwanath Arlekar's obstinate use of contentious political 
iconography has shattered the veneer of harmony with the State government that marked his 
early months in office. Over the last fortnight, two Kerala Ministers have protested and 
boycotted official events held at the Raj Bhavan, taking strong exception to a garlanded 
portrait of Bharat Mata - Mother India - in front of a lion and holding a saffron flag against 
what appears to be a map of Akhand Bharat (undivided India). Leaders of the ruling Left Democratic 
Front decried the imagery, condemning it as a ploy to inject a Hindu nationalist agenda into the 
constitutional office of the Governor. Mr. Arlekar nonchalantly ascribed the idea to the spirit of 
nationalism and patriotism. The rift has since spilled over into the streets, leading to confrontations 
between workers of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) and the Bharatiya Janata Party across the 
State. The Mother India motif traces its origins to the late 19th century work, Anandamath, by Bankim 
Chandra Chattopadhyay, which personified the country as an oppressed Hindu goddess with a glorious 
past aspiring to regain her enormous might. It featured 'Vande Mataram', which became hugely popular 
and accepted as India's national song. With the nationalist movement taking shape, the image found 
countless iterations across forms of cultural and political expression. In the early 20th century, artist 
Abanindranath Tagore depicted Bharat Mata as a four-armed goddess holding a piece of white cloth, 
sheaves of paddy, a book and a string of beads. While Anandamath came under criticism for its 
perceived communal undertones, with the image being appropriated by Hindu religious nationalists, 
Abanindranath's image was seen as a 'humanisation' of the divine mother. If painter Amrita Shergill 
poignantly pictured Mother India as a pining mother staring into an uncertain future, political and cultural 
portrayals of Mother India relied on the metaphor of a woman who was a divine, benevolent custodian of 
customs and traditions, with the imagery drawing heavily from Hindu iconography. Her flag changed 
between the tricolour and saffron, depending on who portrayed the image. Calendar art pinned up many 
iterations in drawing rooms. While films such as Mother India cemented the stereotype, Satyajit Ray's 
Devi called out the deification of women as a patriarchal tool of subjugation. 
But religious nationalists continued to weaponise the symbolism, imaginatively blending the visual of a 
decked-up Hindu goddess with a united Hindu Rashtra. Secularists such as M.F. Husain, too, were 
drawn to the idea of the nation as a woman and it got deeply etched in the collective psyche of the 
people. Given the lack of a standard depiction of the metaphor of Mother India, the present controversy 
K 

            was avoidable. Governors would do well to desist from employing a Hindu majoritarian version of a 
multilayered iconic image for political expediency.