Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 49

Building capacities: On India and Europe trade talks 
India can gain from accelerated trade diplomacy in Europe 
The security breach where a Khalistani protester approached External Affairs Minister S. 
Jaishankar's car in London overshadowed the headlines on his week-long visit to the United 
Kingdom and Ireland. And the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) made its displeasure clear to 
the Minister's British hosts. The scheduled visit, however, was not changed and Mr. 
Jaishankar side-stepped the scare, announcing that India-U.K. relations were set for a "very 
big pickup" despite their "complex history" and current problems. India is building its 
capacities in the U.K., with two consulates, in Manchester and Belfast, while Mr. Jaishankar's 
extended talks with U.K. Foreign Secretary David Lammy focused on the much-delayed conclusion of a 
Free Trade Agreement (FTA). The Agreement, which was due to be finished after U.K.'s 'Brexit' in 
2020, has missed deadlines. Talks over an FTA dominated discussions in Ireland too, and came days 
after India and the European Union (EU) committed to concluding their Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA) 
- for which talks began in 2007 - by the end of 2025. Bilateral trade with the U.K. ($52 billion) and 
Ireland ($17 billion) are underpowered, and discussions on enhancing collaborations, especially in 
high-tech trade, were on the agenda in both capitals. The FTA talks, India-U.K. (restarted last month) 
and India-EU (another round this week), will benefit from India's more conciliatory position on import 
duties with the U.S., which have been a sticking point for them as well. The government's decision to 
reduce tariffs on wines and spirits, motor and electric vehicles, in deference to U.S. President Trump's 
demands, is a case in point, and more cuts are expected in negotiating an India-U.S. BTA. 
In that sense, Mr. Trump's reordering of U.S. alliances and trade policy may well have been the wind in 
Mr. Jaishankar's sails. The trip followed visits to Delhi by a high-power EU delegation led by European 
Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and a senior ministerial and business team led by Belgian 
Princess Astrid, that imparted the sense that Europe is looking for new, more dependable friends. Mr. 
Jaishankar's visit also came close on the heels of the dramatic showdown at the White House between 
Mr. Trump and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, which led to an urgent summit of non-U.S. 
NATO countries being held in London, where U.K. Prime Minister Keir Starmer committed to support 
Ukraine with a "Coalition of the Willing". As geopolitical and geo-financial calculations are being 
reworked across the Atlantic, India stands to gain by accelerated diplomacy and offering a hand of 
friendship to both sides.


Temporary respite: on GST, India's manufacturing 
India's growth strategy must focus on boosting domestic consumption 
India's Goods and Services Tax collection in April, since the indirect taxation framework was 
implemented in 2017, has consistently hit record highs. This April was no different - generally 
because of businesses tallying their books and completing their financial year-end tax 
commitments. The gross GST collected this time was about ₹2.37 lakh crore, marking an on-year 
growth of 12.6% from last April. After refunds, the central government netted over ₹2.09 lakh crore, 
an on-year rise of 9.1%. This also signifies a marked rise in GST compliance, also aided by faster 
refunds, which are crucial for small businesses as they work with thin working capital, and the mass 
adoption of fintech. The fintech adoption rate in India, at 87%, which is well above the global average, 
and aided by the insular COVID-19 years of 2020-21, has brought in millions from the MSME sector into 
the formal banking system, enabling better tax compliance and regulatory supervision. Wider compliance 
is also evident from April's GST collections from 2018 to 2025, which has more than doubled from ₹1.03 
lakh crore to ₹2.37 lakh crore. 
What is significant this April has been the 86% rise in refunds issued to exporters and the 20.8% 
increase in GST revenues from imports. This correlates with the 10-month high growth in the April print 
of HSBC India Manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI). The PMI rose from 58.1 in March to 
58.2 in April. The survey indicated a sharp rise in new business aided by greater international demand. 
Orders from abroad grew to the largest degree in over 14 years in the first month of the 2026 fiscal year, 
with demand led by Africa, Asia, Europe, West Asia and the Americas. This suggests that businesses 
have scrambled to get their orders in before the 90-day pause on tariffs by the U.S. ends on July 9. It 
also suggests a possible re-alignment in supply chains, with greater sourcing from India, as the U.S. 
tariffs on China appear to be more ____________ and certain, with the possibility of transshipment goods 
from China being taxed, without a high value-add threshold. Apple has said at its January-to-March 
quarterly earnings call that it intends to source 'most of its iPhones' for the U.S., its largest market, from 
India. This suggests a temporary respite for India's manufacturing sector, which witnessed a four-year 
growth low at 4% in the last fiscal. A more durable growth strategy would be to boost domestic 
consumption and wrangle favourable concessions for its manufacturing sector from the many ongoing 
trade agreements. 
I