Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 71

A cut in time: On RBI and repo rate cut 
Countries must build on their economic strengths, not create trade barriers 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI)'s Monetary Policy Committee's unanimous decision to cut the 
repo rate by 25 basis points, to 6%, is a timely reprieve for India's business community. For 
weeks now, exporting sectors have been imploring the government to hasten bilateral trade 
negotiations with the U.S. to attempt to shield themselves from President Donald Trump's 
"reciprocal" tariffs. The tariffs have been paused for 90 days, except for the 10% universal 
tariff, which is still applicable. The pause, even while raising tariffs against China to 125% in a trade 
stand-off with Beijing, suggests a strategy pivot to stem the massive sell-off of U.S. treasury bonds and 
the gutting of trillions of dollars in American stock valuations. Worried about an economic slowdown as 
investor sentiment turns negative, the RBI has changed its stance from "neutral" to "accommodative" that 
could indicate further rate cuts are likely. A decrease in the repo rate will most likely be reflected in loan 
service reductions for businesses, homeowners and retail borrowers, as banks pass on the rate cut. This 
began happening hours after the rate cut announcement. The central bank hopes this rate reduction 
ensures liquidity for businesses in a time of uncertainty, so that they can continue investing in the real 
economy even as they attempt to diversify their exports. 
More ominous, however, is the RBI's lowered GDP growth estimates for the current fiscal, from 6.7% to 
6.5%. This indicates that despite the RBI's growth stimulus, steadily declining retail inflation - down to 
3.61% in February - and steep falls in food staple prices, the central bank expects a growth contraction 
due to the uncertain economic climate. It is a universally accepted economic principle that stable 
governance, along with a predictable policy framework, is a necessary condition to foster growth. It 
would be no exaggeration to say that this principle has been turned on its head since Mr. Trump's return 
as President. China's move to impose retaliatory tariffs, totalling 84%, signals the beginning of a full-
blown trade war, the likes of which the world has not witnessed since the Smoot-Hawley Act of 1930. 
Those tariffs, with objectives similar to the current ones - to protect American farming and 
manufacturing - ushered in an era of economic nationalism in the inter-war years, hitting global trade 
and contributing significantly to the Great Depression. Perhaps a lesson for nations must be that 
protecting one's own economy can be achieved without hurting others, so long as countries recognise 
their competitive advantages and build on them. In America's case, it is doubling down on research, 
education and innovation. 
T


Clean AI: On AI data centres and energy demand 
The International Monetary Fund's report that pointed to the likelihood of the economic gains of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications outweighing the environmental costs of the increased 
energy demand that AI data centres will require is reassuring. It underscores that this 
transformational technology is not fundamentally at odds with the global imperative to pursue 
sustainable growth strategies across the board. Countries that are better prepared with 
renewable energy generation are bound to see a lower social and environmental cost to pursuing their AI 
ambitions. India's AI infrastructure - at least the part of it that the government is indirectly funding 
through the IndiaAI Mission - does not rise to the level of weighing at a macro level on the nation's 
energy mix. Still, the need for pursuing renewables specifically for AI is necessary to follow. This is 
already in a sense the government's approach to the issue, outlined at the AI Action Summit in Paris 
earlier this year. While AI is not the sole industry where a push for renewable energy and sustainable 
practices is important, the sector nevertheless offers itself up for two main reasons. The first is the sheer 
volume of electricity that it is set to consume. The IMF's report indicates that in the United States - the 
single largest home for AI computing capacity globally - "AI expansion alone could increase electricity 
prices by up to 9 percent, adding to price pressures coming from many other sources". As such, 
renewable energy could play a major role in cushioning against a multifold rise in emissions that 
conventional energy sources would likely entail. The second is that data centres lend themselves 
uniquely to captive renewable infrastructure. Some Indian firms have already made moves to purchase 
renewable energy, and the hundreds of acres that data centres occupy are ripe for complementing 
equipment with solar cells. Nuclear energy may also turn out to be a welcome contribution: small 
modular reactors at emerging data centre clusters, in conjunction with other renewable sources, would 
avert a sizeable quantity of emissions. 
Electricity use is not the only environmental footprint that the AI age will leave behind - the technology 
requires large-scale mining of minerals and water use, and produces effluents in the manufacturing of 
the electronics supply chain. As electronics manufacturing is another space that India aspires to grow in, 
these opportunities must be pursued in this area too. India's net zero target for 2070 will demand a 
scaling down of conventional sources of emissions, and managing the rise of industries that are poised 
to expand their share of global energy consumption. 
T