Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 24

WHO is right: On the U.S. leaving the World Health Organization 
The U.S. must return to WHO's fold in its own interest 
resident Donald Trump's decision to withdraw the United States from the World Health 
Organization (WHO), based on charges of bias, is stunningly short sighted, and deeply 
concerning to the global health community. Pundits are predicting that this move, if not 
withdrawn, or reconsidered, may well unleash the butterfly effect - a cascading set of 
unpredictable consequences arising from even the smallest of changes in a system. Soon 
after his inauguration, Mr. Trump wasted no time in announcing the beginning of the process 
of ending the U.S.'s membership of WHO. In language that smacked of petulance, Mr. Trump, as he 
signed his first batch of executive orders, declared: "The World Health [Organization] ripped us off." The 
U.S. will now leave the United Nations health agency in 12 months' time and stop all financial 
contributions to its work. He accused the organisation of mishandling the COVID-19 pandemic, and of 
being partisan towards China, though the U.S. contributed more to its coffers. The move has not been 
entirely unexpected: during his previous term as U.S. President, he relentlessly criticized WHO for 
acting slow and being "owned and controlled by China"; in 2020 he initiated a move to halt funding to 
WHO, though it was scuppered as his term came to an end. 
Why is the withdrawal of the U.S. significant? For starters, Mr. Trump is right - the U.S., which is a 
founding member of WHO, is also its biggest financial backer, contributing around 18% of its overall 
funding. Withdrawal of these funds will seriously (1A) ___________ health programmes being 
implemented across the world, including interventions for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and the eradication of 
certain infectious diseases. WHO is also involved in ensuring equity of access to life-saving drugs for 
people across the world, building stronger health systems, detecting and preventing disease outbreaks. 
If Mr. Trump could set his petulance aside, it would be clear that global health does not operate in silos, 
and neither a stern countenance nor physical boundaries can keep pathogens out of one's own 
geography. If any lessons have been learned at all from the COVID-19 pandemic, it is that no one is safe 
until everyone is safe, and that collaboration among nations, and open sharing of data and technology 
are essential to tackle pandemics. WHO has reached out to the U.S., hoping that it will reconsider its 
decision and engage once again with it. As fantastic as it may sound, medicine is no stranger to 
miracles of science, and the health community hopes one more will restore the U.S. back to WHO's fold.


Capex quandary: On the economic data, policy 
Private investments remain tentative amid growth concerns 
ince the COVID-19 pandemic, the Centre has been using public capital expenditure on 
infrastructure to pump prime the economic recovery. The mantra has been that infrastructure 
building will stoke demand for products such as cement and steel, generate jobs in construction, 
and together trigger a strong multiplier effect on the economy, eventually creating conducive 
conditions for private investors to plan greenfield and brownfield projects. In Budget 2024-25, Finance 
Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said the government will endeavour to maintain strong fiscal support for 
infrastructure over the next five years, in conjunction with imperatives of other priorities and fiscal 
consolidation. She announced ₹11.11 lakh crore of capex spends this year, amounting to 3.4% of GDP. 
That goal is unlikely to be attained partly due to spending curbs in the poll-affected first quarter. While 
industry has urged the Centre to continue the capex push in 2025-26 as well, it has failed to respond to 
the government's constant nudges and persuasions to ramp up their own operations. 
Data show that two of this year's first three quarters have recorded a notable sequential decline in 
private investment plans, particularly by domestic industry. In Q1, private capex plans dropped to multi-
year lows, and though the July-September quarter recorded a recovery in investment intentions, that 
uptick has dissipated in Q3. Projects Today data suggest domestic investments' value dropped 1.4% 
from Q2, while new projects' value dropped over 22% from a year ago as per the Centre for Monitoring 
Indian Economy. There are many factors playing on corporate risk-taking capacity - weak Q2 results, 
global uncertainties, spiking costs and waning demand in more lucrative urban markets. Going by current 
indications, including the early bird Q3 results, demand has not really improved, nor is there ostensible 
pressure on factory capacities to warrant expansions. For a sustainable breakout from this slowdown, 
private capital should take the driving seat because there are limits to enhancing public capex while 
maintaining fiscal rectitude and providing for myriad welfare schemes. The government must accept that 
exhortations to industry are unlikely to spur fresh outlays, and incentives focused on themes such as 
import-substitution are insufficient. Not one new rupee will be deployed if a project is unviable and 
demand flaky. Policy focus should remain firmly on ensuring the ground is ripe to instigate investments 
and easing the realization of such plans into billowing chimneys and new jobs. For that, boosting 
incomes and consumption is critical as is expediting macro- and micro-level reforms. That an economic 
policy framework outlining next generation reforms, promised in the Budget, has not been heard of since 
then, is not very comforting. 
S