Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 34

Time and timing: On the CEC selection process 
The validity of the CEC selection process needs early adjudication 
nce again, the mannerof appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and 
Election Commissioners (EC) hasbecome controversial, with the government going ahead 
with the process laid down in its December 2023 law, which is under challenge before the 
Supreme Court. Last week, the Court had deferred the hearing to February 19, while 
observing that if there was any development in the interregnum, it would meet the 
consequences of a subsequent decision on the validity of the Act. Ignoring a request from 
the Leader of the Opposition (LoP), Rahul Gandhi, the panel elevated Gyanesh Kumar as the CEC and 
inducted Vivek Joshi as the third member, following the retirement of CEC Rajiv Kumar. The question is 
whether the Act of 2023 goes against a 2022 Constitution Bench verdict that put in place a committee 
comprising the Prime Minister, the LoP and the Chief Justice of India (CJI) to select the persons to helm 
the Election Commission of India (ECI). The Act, however, includes a Union Minister in the committee 
instead of the CJI. The government argues that the Court's panel was only an ad hoc measure until 
Parliament came forward with its own law, as required in the Constitution. The petitioners maintain that 
the thrustof the 2022 judgment isthat the appointment process should be insulated from executive 
interference so that its functioning will be truly independent. 
Whether the CJI should be part of the selection committee is debatable, but there is little doubt that the 
2:1 majority vested in the executive renders any selection vulnerable to the criticism that those chosen 
in that manner would not be seen as independent. The BJP-led government has been making 
appointments in the midst of court hearings. The Court has been declining to interfere in time, leading to 
such appointments becoming a fait accompli. The government had appointed Arun Goel as an EC in 
2022, in the middle of the Constitution Bench hearing, and two ECs in March 2024 in the run-up to the 
general election to replace Mr. Goel, who had resigned, and another EC who had retired. Few will 
disagree that the public perceptionof the ECI as a fearless and fiercely independent institution hasbeen 
on the decline. If elections are to be seen as free and fair by the whole electorate and not merely 
followers of the winners, the Court should not delay this matter any further. It has to adjudicate the 
question of whether the procedure set out in the law falls short of the level of independence envisaged 
in the Constitution Bench verdict for members of the ECI.


Judges' dilemma: On the judiciary, its accountability 
Accountability and independence ought to be equally important for judges 
The Lokpal's ruling that High Court judges are amenable to its jurisdiction and the Supreme 
Court order staying it on its own motion raise more than a mere question of law. The issue 
concerns both the independence of the judiciary and its accountability. That the Court, 
government law officers and senior advocates found the Lokpal's decision disturbing is 
understandable, as many believe that judicial independence will be undermined if judges of 
constitutional courts are made answerable to the Lokpal, even though they fall under the 
definition of 'public servant' under the Prevention of Corruption Act. The Lokpal view appears to be 
prima facie incorrect. There is nothing to suggest that superior court judges were ever considered to be 
under its remit. Last month, the Lokpal, headed by former Supreme Court judge, A.M. Khanwilkar, 
rejected a corruption complaint against a former Chief Justice of India (CJI) on the ground that the 
Lokpal Act, 2013, did not concern apex court judges and that its reference to "persons" who are 
members of any body or authority created by an Act of Parliament cannot be applied to the Supreme 
Court, an institution established by the Constitution. However, in respect of High Court judges, it said 
High Courts established by statutes creating the respective States were statutory bodies, and their 
judges were "persons" within the meaning of Section 14 of the Lokpal Act. 
The independence of the judiciary was the foremost consideration when the Court held in K. 
Veeraswami vs Union of India (1991) that no case can be registered against them without consulting 
the CJI, even though it also said judges were public servants under the Prevention of Corruption Act. 
Based on this principle, the Lokpal has referred the complaint to the CJI. While the Lokpal ruling is set to 
be reviewed, the time may have come to address the issue of accountability in the rare event of a 
credible corruption charge arising against a judge. The matter is now dealt with by the Court through an 
in-house procedure, initiated only if the Chief Justice of a High Court, or the CJI or the President 
receives a complaint. If the charges appear true, asking the judges concerned to resign, denying them 
judicial work or recommending their removal through Parliament are the options available. Some judges 
are transferred from one High Court to another, but whether a corruption charge is the reason is never 
disclosed. The Court should see if the present mechanism is enough or it needs to be expanded to 
include credible follow-up action such as an independent prosecution under its supervision. Both 
accountability and independence ought to be equally important for the judiciary.