Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 18

Farm fire: On the fast by Jagjit Singh Dallewal, farmers' demands 
Jagjit Singh Dallewal should end his fast and press for talks on farmers' demands 
The sit-in protest that began almost a year ago by a group of farmers owing allegiance to 
the Samyukt Kisan Morcha (Non-Political) at the Punjab-Haryana border has taken a new 
turn with their leader Jagjit Singh Dallewal refusing to end his indefinite fast, that started on 
November 26. The stand of the 70-year-old leader, a cancer patient, has drawn the 
attention of the Supreme Court. Farmers in the State, across their organizational and 
political positions, supported a Punjab bandh on December 30, 2024, in solidarity with Mr. 
Dallewal. The Court has allowed the Punjab government time till Thursday (January 2, 2024) to ensure 
that Mr. Dallewal gets medical aid. The farmers' outfits have told the Court that their leader would accept 
medical help only if the Union Government held a discussion with them on their demands such as 
implementing a legalized Minimum Support Price as per the formula of the National Commission on 
Farmers (constituted by M.S. Swaminathan), a debt waiver for all farmers and the withdrawal of all cases 
against farmers for protesting against the three farm laws, which were repealed in 2021. Major farmers' 
organizations in the State, including the Samyukt Kisan Morcha, Bharatiya Kisan Union (Ekta-Ugrahan) 
and the All-India Kisan Sabha, have urged the Centre and State governments to address the demands 
so that Mr. Dallewal ends his fast. Several Opposition parties had also demanded that the Centre start a 
dialogue with farmers. 
It is debatable how helpful the Court's ultimatum is in situations such as these when policy, law and 
order and politics are all intertwined. Perhaps, the courts should not be so interfering and governments 
should be more proactive and preemptive in dealing with such flare-ups. The demands on the table 
have been pending for long, and the crisis in agriculture is multifaceted. But allowing these permanent 
sit-in protests is problematic when someone goes on a fast unto death because there is no way to know 
if he is being forced to starve to death or not allowed to end the fast. Many of the farmers' leaders have 
met Mr. Dallewal requesting him to end his hunger strike. However, such requests have been turned 
down with his supporters labelling other farmers' leaders as agents of the government. Sane voices 
among the farmers have been maintaining that Mr. Dallewal should join the joint protests rather than 
adopting his fast unto death protest. The Punjab and Haryana governments and the Union Government 
must ensure that his life is not in danger. Mr. Dallewal and his associates should heed the advice of 
other farmers' leaders and clear the apprehensions that he is under pressure to continue with the 
hunger strike.


Queen's gambit: on Koneru Humpy's chess win 
Koneru Humpy must try to repeat her success in the classical format 
here was almost a sense of inevitability to the World rapid chess championship that 
concluded in New York on Sunday (India time). Given the astonishing year that India has had 
in chess, it was as if there had to be an Indian champion, and Koneru Humpy ensured there 
was one. The 37-year-old from Vijayawada won the women's World rapid championship after 
defeating Indonesia's Irene Sukandar in the final round. This is the second World rapid title for Humpy, 
which she won first in 2019. This is even more remarkable as she had been seeded 10th and had to face 
several younger rivals. Chess is getting younger and younger. D. Gukesh proved it just a fortnight ago in 
Singapore, when he became the youngest world champion in history at 18. Gukesh's victory came in the 
classical variety of chess, while Humpy's was in a format of much shorter time control. The fact that it 
has not been her favourite format - which remains classical - makes her success even more special. 
Ironically, she has never won the classical World championship, though she has come close in the past. 
The latest triumph should inspire her to mount another challenge for the trophy that matters the most. 
Humpy's success is only the latest reminder about India's stature as the superpower in international 
chess. In September this year, India's men's and women's teams emerged as champions at the Chess 
Olympiad, in which just about every country took part. Only the former Soviet Union and China have 
claimed a twin gold at the Olympiad before. India is now to world chess what the Soviet Union was for 
decades. The country may still have to go a long way before it could rival the popularity that chess 
enjoyed in the USSR during its golden days but India is churning out world beaters with remarkable 
consistency. An active chess federation despite the internal quibbles, a familiar tale for Indian sport, 
huge parental support, increasing interest from the corporate sector and the availability of Grandmasters 
as coaches across the country have all contributed to the Indian chess revolution, which was begun by 
five-time World champion Viswanathan Anand. But for India to retain its position as the global giant in the 
mind game, more has to be done. Except for a few States such as Tamil Nadu, chess still does not get 
the recognition it deserves. Recently, Tania Sachdev, a member of the victorious Indian women's team 
at the Olympiad, had to go public about the lack of support for chess from the Delhi government.