Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 87

Quantum challenge: On IIT-DRDO demonstration of quantum key-distribution scheme 
Administrative reform is essential for India to make advances 
cientists from IIT-Delhi and the DRDO recently demonstrated a key advance in quantum 
cybersecurity that stands to revolutionize how the world will communicate in the future. The 
world's secrets are currently stored and communicated via channels that are protected by 
difficult mathematical problems. Over the years, an increasing amount of computing power 
available to certain actors has forced these problems to become difficult and nigh-uncrackable. 
The imminence of quantum computing requires this paradigm to change because quantum computers 
can (at least on paper) solve problems currently out of reach of the most powerful conventional 
supercomputers. Quantum cybersecurity is one prong of this change, promising to protect 
communication channels irrespective of the computing power available to malicious actors. The IIT-Delhi 
and DRDO team successfully demonstrated a quantum key-distribution scheme through one kilometre of 
free space on the institute's campus. Such a technology allows two individuals (or stations) located a 
kilometre apart to securely access messages they send each other. If an eavesdropper tries to intercept 
any message, instantaneous changes in the keys the individuals use to decrypt the messages will reveal 
the channel has been compromised, and in a way that the eavesdropper cannot prevent. If scaled up to 
include satellites, the technology could allow stations anywhere in India to exchange information through 
a quantum network without fear of being compromised. 
Herein lies the rub. Quantum communications is one of the four themes of the National Quantum 
Mission, approved in 2023 with an outlay of ₹6,003 crore until 2031. Many of the same problems 
assailing fundamental research in India have already beset research under the Mission, however. A 
small fraction of the outlay has been disbursed thus far even as venture capital flow into startups remains 
trivial. Scientists have complained that just-in-time funding, absence of single-window clearances, and 
documentation requirements have increased the duration of projects. There are persistent foreign 
hardware and software dependencies: materials required for specific use-cases, such as cryostats and 
sensors, need to be fabricated abroad while most quantum software stacks are currently implemented by 
multinational companies. Government pay does not match global offers and lack of timely access to 
resources has forced researchers to accept short-term contracts and rent equipment. In fact, India's 
commitment, itself down from the ₹8,000 crore announced in 2020, is dwarfed by those of the U.S. and 
China, which are five- and 20-times higher, respectively. If the demonstration at IIT-Delhi is to scale, the 
S 

            government cannot simply 'clip on' scientific talent and technological and economic opportunity to 
existing infrastructure. Administrative reform is essential.


Theft and compensation: On news publishers and AI models 
arge language artificial intelligence models are fuelled by content on the Internet, and much of 
this content comprises news reports gathered, curated and published by media professionals 
and organisations with decades of experience. As creative industries reckon with their labour 
getting diffused into unaccountable clusters of graphics processing units that reproduce styles 
and spit out human-level artwork in mere seconds, the news industry has reason to fear the 
compounding of permission-less innovation into an existentially threatening heist of several lifetimes of 
work. Previous waves of digitisation peeled away captive audiences from print and broadcast media by 
replacing these with a web-charged attention economy, and Big Tech platforms further squeezed news 
media's place in these rapid transformations by often short-changing the very sources of information that 
their businesses relied on to be useful to the public. In a landscape where even precarious business 
models in the Internet age are threatened by a reluctance to pay for news and declining public trust in 
professional news-gathering, AI may very well be a body blow. It is clear: AI firms, with their billions in 
market capitalisation, must not be permitted to just take what they want from the Internet, synthesise 
these inputs into monetised insights, and pretend that the whole process is a form of victimless, 
innovative progress. Publishers have a clear right to decide who gets to hoover up their entire corpuses, 
and to ensure that their businesses benefit from the AI wave. To this end, the Department for Promotion 
of Industry and Internal Trade's committee on copyright and AI is a welcome step. 
This is not a decelerationist, or "decel" demand, as those who advocate for rapid AI development might 
be quick to say. The news industry has fought as search giants and social media companies profited 
enormously on the back of its content and set the terms for how the financial benefits flowed back to it. 
That cannot be permitted to happen - as social media platforms turn more and more into video-focused 
walled gardens, discouraging even a step outside their apps. For the news organisations, the avenues to 
earn are shrinking. As AI-generated overviews of news content with source links are reduced to a 
footnote, it is time for compensation to be negotiated at the time of publishers' content being scraped 
from their websites in the first place. AI firms may claim "fair use" in model training, but there is nothing 
fair - morally or legally - about accessing and disseminating troves of news without taking the creators 
and processors into confidence. News publishers and policymakers must now fight for their share in the 
AI era. 
L