Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 9

Sound and fury: On the parliamentary debate on the Constitution 
The Constitution might be a unifier, but the debate exposed polarization 
The parliamentary debate on the Constitution turned out to be yet another occasion of intense 
diatribe between the ruling alliance and the Opposition. While both sides agreed on the 
supremacy of the Constitution, now in its 75th year, each accused the other of undermining it. 
The debate could have been an opportunity to explore a new common ground for a sharply 
polarized polity, but, unfortunately, that is not how it played out. Speakers from parties in power, led by 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and Opposition speakers led by the Leader of Opposition, Rahul Gandhi, 
railed against their political opponents and used the Constitution as a facade for their partisan politics. 
Mr. Gandhi views the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Mr. Modi as disloyal to the Constitution, and 
sought to connect it all to the Hindutva ideology. Mr. Modi singled out Mr. Gandhi's family, starting from 
This great-grandfather and the first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, for a no-holds-barred attack - that 
it has undermined the Constitution through acts of omission and commission. Both sides used facts 
selectively and the statements of past actors to exaggerate the point that their opponents did more harm 
to the Constitution than they themselves. Such an approach may work as a propaganda strategy but can 
do little in terms of constructive engagement on the question. 
The Constitution, understood as a living document, provides the foundation and the framework for a 
fairer social, political and economic order for the country. Constitutionalism is an evolving project, and 
any discussion on it must account for this dynamism. History is a good teacher, but litigating the past 
endlessly is not a helpful learning technique. There have been many dark moments in the 75-year history 
of the Constitution, including the imposition of Emergency, but the brighter and bigger picture is that it 
still offers the strongest possible ethos for a secular, pluralist and progressive nation. The BJP and the 
Congress calling each other names is akin to the pot calling the kettle black. Both sides say they are for 
strengthening the unity of the country, but accuse each other of dividing the country. What emerges from 
the debate is that there is a lot of blame to go around; what we're missing were introspection and self-
reflection. Mr. Modi is right in saying that the Constitution is a unifier of the nation, and cited his 
government's push for a uniform civil code as an example of the commitment to advancing this unity. 
Uneven demographic and economic trends will require close and unified attention by the political class in 
the decades ahead to reimagine the constitutional scheme. Sadly, little time was spent on these 
questions. 
T


Welcome spotlight: On the Supreme Court directive to Manipur government 
The Supreme Court's renewed emphasis on monitoring Manipur is welcome 
earing a case by petitioners aggrieved with the unremitting hostilities in Manipur, the Supreme 
Court of India has directed the Manipur government to disclose details of destroyed and 
encroached properties following the ethnic violence a year and a half ago. The Court had also, 
a few months ago, extended the working tenure of the Justice Gita Mittal-led Committee 
supervising the investigations related to the violence and also humanitarian assistance and 
relief in the State. Ideally, these steps should not have been under the aegis of the Court and, instead, 
under the remit of the executive governments - in this case, the State and the Union Home Ministry. But 
the violent imagery of sexual violence, the wanton destruction of property, including places of worship, 
and the continuing hostility between the State's two ethnic groups had forced the Court's hand into 
foraying into a supervisory role through the Justice Mittal Committee. It has also become an imperative 
for the higher judiciary, first, because of the remarkable reticence of the Union government in answering 
questions from civil society and the political Opposition related to the situation in the State, and second, 
due to the lack of accountability by the misfiring State government that has been ineffective in bridging 
the ethnic gap. Even political representatives from the same parties have been split on ethnic lines and 
there seems little convergence in the political demands being made by the opposite camps. 
There is also the rise of non-state actors, armed with sophisticated weapons - many of which are looted 
from the State armouries - exercising their illegal writ on the political process. They have also been 
engaged in violent acts in places such as Jiribam, which did not see any ethnic conflagrations earlier. 
Manipur's tragic descent into ethnic hostilities receives national attention only when the scale of the 
violence is horrifying and reaches unconscionable levels. Despite the government averring that it is 
taking steps to restore the rule of law and addressing the political differences, a return to the status quo 
ante before May 2023 seems far away. The Court's renewed attention is, therefore, welcome, but shorn 
of meaningful steps to reverse the spiral of hostilities, this exercise would remain incomplete. The 
government's attorneys have also sought to retain a veil of secrecy over the committee's functioning and 
findings using the tired rhetoric of "national security". The Court should not pay heed to this ploy which 
seems more a case of seeking to divert attention than helping to find meaningful solutions to the conflict. 
Across the world, conflict resolution has focused on mechanisms such as "truth and reconciliation" 
exercises which have privileged accountability and normative actions, something that remains absent in 
Manipur. The Committee's findings may provide the necessary push in the right direction. 
H