Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 58

Going electric: On India and the electric vehicle space 
India must be a reliable trade partner to compete in the EV space 
India's decision to exempt import duties on 35 capital goods used in the manufacture of electric 
vehicle (EV) batteries and 28 items used in the making of mobile phone batteries is a welcome 
step toward boosting domestic manufacturing and clean technology adoption. Proposed by 
Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman in the Union Budget 2025-26 and formalised through the 
Finance Bill 2025 passed in Parliament on Tuesday, this signals a strategic policy shift. Earlier in 
March, Chinese EV giant BYD unveiled its "Super E-platform", capable of giving a vehicle a 500-
kilometre range with just five minutes of charging - a major leap toward alleviating range anxiety, 
which is a key barrier to EV adoption. This innovation directly challenges the convenience of 
conventional vehicles and could accelerate the global EV transition if scaled and deployed with the 
same ubiquity as traditional fuel stations. Batteries remain the most expensive component in an EV, 
comprising roughly 40% of the vehicle's cost. This cost burden has slowed EV adoption in lower-income 
countries, despite the long-term advantage of reducing oil import dependence, which is especially 
relevant for India. Another critical barrier is the lack of indigenous technological capability in battery 
manufacturing. China currently dominates this sector, producing over 70% of all EV batteries globally, 
according to the International Energy Agency. The lithium-iron-phosphate (LFP) battery has emerged as 
the industry standard over the past five years due to its lower cost, higher energy density, and better 
thermal management. 
While EVs made up 45% of all car registrations in China in 2024, they accounted for just 2% of India's 
passenger car market. However, electric two-wheelers (e2w) have seen notable momentum in India, 
with 1.14 million units sold in 2024, making up about 60% of total EV sales. Though India's duty 
exemptions are partially aimed at strengthening bilateral trade ties with the United States and avoiding 
reciprocal tariffs, the broader strategic objective should be to decarbonise its transport sector. To 
achieve this, India must integrate into both the upstream (mining and refining) and downstream 
(manufacturing and assembly) segments of the global EV battery value chain. This would not only help 
lower battery costs through technology transfer but also position India as a reliable alternative to China in 
the eyes of developed nations seeking supply chain diversification. India's long-term success in the EV 
space will depend on its ability to leverage favourable trade policies, invest in research and 
development, and secure a strong foothold in the global battery ecosystem.


Heat plan: On Indian cities and heat-related preparedness 
India must develop a comprehensive heat strategy ahead of COP30 
ummer has arrived early in several parts of India. In the last week of February, heatwaves were 
officially reported in Goa and Maharashtra. States such as Odisha, Telangana, and 
Maharashtra have already recorded temperatures exceeding 40°C. Throughout most of 
February, 31 States and Union Territories experienced night temperatures at least 1°C above 
normal, with 22 States and Union Territories reporting night temperatures that were 3°C to 5°C 
above normal. Given that February is classified as 'winter' by the India Meteorological 
Department, these are signposts that point toward new climate normals. Scientists have long warned 
that rising global temperatures - both on land and sea - will result in more intense and frequent 
heatwaves. This underscores the need for countries and States to prepare for heat events just as they 
do for earthquakes or floods. However, a recent study by the Sustainable Futures Collaborative, which 
examined heat-related preparedness in nine Indian cities, found that none had long-term plans in place. 
Most responses are limited to short-term emergency measures such as providing drinking water, 
adjusting work hours, and boosting hospital capacity during heatwaves. Crucial long-term interventions 
such as ensuring access to household or occupational cooling for vulnerable populations, insuring 
workers against lost income on extremely hot days, improving fire management, and upgrading 
electricity grids for reliability are missing. Few cities have even begun planning for expanded local 
weather monitoring, mapping urban heat islands, or training those responsible for implementing heat 
plans. Other strategies, which include increasing green cover, creating open spaces to reduce heat, and 
deploying rooftop solar for active cooling, are often carried out without targeting the populations that are 
most at risk. 
While global efforts to combat climate change largely focus on cutting greenhouse gas emissions, the 
limited progress on that front is shifting attention to adaptation - particularly in managing responses to 
heat. Affordable cooling devices are frequently recommended, but they raise concerns about increased 
use of ozone-depleting refrigerants. Experts now advocate having sustainable buildings, green 
infrastructure, and passive cooling solutions, although these too can impact land prices and urban 
planning. India must develop a comprehensive national heat strategy and embed it within its National 
Adaptation Plan ahead of the 30th UN Climate Change Conference (COP30) in Brazil in November.