Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 32

Growth over inflation: On economic expansion over inflation control 
The interest rate cut signals a shift in the Reserve Bank of India's immediate 
priorities 
or the first time in nearly five years, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Reserve Bank 
of India (RBI) pivoted on interest rates, unanimously deciding to cut the benchmark repo rate 
from 6.50% to 6.25%. This move, while maintaining a neutral stance, marks a significant 
departure from the previous bi-monthly review, where the committee had opted for the status 
quo with a 4:2 vote. At the time, the MPC was contending with inflation at a 15-month high of 
6.2% in October and a sluggish second-quarter GDP growth of 5.4%. Now, with inflation 
moderating to 5.2% in December, still above the RBI's 4% target, and growth projections for 2024-25 
slipping to a four-year low of 6.4%, the central bank appears to be prioritising economic expansion over 
inflation control. RBI Governor Sanjay Malhotra, in his first policy review, highlighted the challenges 
posed by global economic uncertainties, including stalled disinflation, diminishing prospects of rate cuts 
in the U.S., and a stronger dollar pressuring emerging markets and their currencies, including the rupee. 
These factors have complicated policy trade-offs for India, making the case for supporting growth even 
stronger. The MPC justified its decision to look past current inflationary concerns, citing expectations 
that price pressures will ease further, with inflation projected to average 4.2% in 2025-26 from 4.8% this 
year. This outlook hinges on assumptions of a favourable food inflation trajectory, a normal monsoon, 
and a bumper harvest of key vegetables such as tomato, onion, and potato, which are, historically, major 
contributors to price spikes. While inflation remains a concern, the panel has signalled that weak 
economic growth is more pressing, especially given the second-quarter slump and limited signs of 
recovery since then. The RBI's post-Budget policy stance also suggests closer alignment with fiscal 
policy, apparently heeding the government's call for monetary and fiscal measures to work in tandem 
rather than at cross-purposes. Whether the Budget's stimulus measures, combined with the rate cut, will 
revive consumption, attract private investment, and boost growth remains uncertain. 
Interestingly, had the MPC met a week later, it might have had additional justification for the rate cut, 
given expectations that inflation in January could have cooled to around 4.5%. With a new Governor at 
the helm and an upcoming appointment for the Deputy Governor overseeing monetary policy, the RBI 
could consider adjusting the MPC's review schedule to incorporate the latest inflation data. A slight shift 
in the timing of its bi-monthly meetings could make monetary policy more responsive and data-driven, 
enhancing the committee's ability to justify its stance with real-time economic indicators.


Troubled waters: On India, Sri Lanka and the fisheries dispute 
India and Sri Lanka must facilitate discussions among their fishermen 
In the latest chapter of the long-standing fisheries dispute in the Palk Bay region, the Sri Lankan 
Navy arrested 14 fishermen from Tamil Nadu's Ramanathapuram district on February 8 for alleged 
poaching in waters north of Mannar. Two trawlers were also impounded. On January 27, the Navy 
fired at an Indian boat near Delft Island, injuring two fishermen. With these arrests, the total number 
of Indian fishermen detained this year has risen to 77. Just last week, a Sri Lankan court released 
nine fishermen from Karaikal, Puducherry, but one other person received a six-month prison 
sentence. Additionally, Sri Lankan courts have been imposing hefty fines, complicating their release. 
Government data over the past decade, based on responses in Parliament, show that in 2024, the 
number of Indian fishermen arrested in Sri Lanka crossed the 500-mark for the first time in 10 years 
(528). There were 787 arrests in 2014. 
In a letter to External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar on February 3, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M.K. Stalin 
said that 97 fishermen and 216 fishing boats were still under the custody of Sri Lanka. Unlike in the 
past, when they were quickly released, recent years have seen rising convictions for violations of the 
International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL) and unlawful fishing. While Tamil Nadu and Puducherry 
fishermen often cross the IMBL, their counterparts in Sri Lanka's Tamil-speaking Northern Province, 
who are still recovering from the civil war, oppose their fishing methods, particularly ecologically 
destructive bottom trawling. Northern Sri Lankan fishermen are seeking a sustainable solution that 
protects their waters from over-exploitative fishing. Indian fishermen have repeatedly sought a fresh 
round of talks with their Sri Lankan counterparts, with the last such meeting having taken place in 
November 2016. The issue was also raised in the most recent Joint Working Group meeting in Colombo 
last October. However, the Anura Kumara Dissanayake-led Sri Lankan government appears reluctant to 
negotiate. New Delhi and Colombo must recognize that a fresh approach is required to break the 
deadlock rather than continuing with a business-as-usual mindset. Unlike the cases of Indian fishermen 
detained in Pakistan, Bangladesh, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar, the arrests in Sri Lanka are significantly 
higher. New Delhi must introduce incentives to encourage Palk Bay fishermen to move away from 
trawling. While this shift will take time, both governments must facilitate immediate discussions between 
their fishing communities to find interim solutions. It is only through proactive diplomacy and sustainable 
fishing policies that this ongoing conflict can be addressed effectively.