Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 65

Wide open: On the Australian Open 
Sinner's win in Melbourne marks a new era in tennis 
The 2025 Australian Open has pushed world tennis into hitherto uncharted territories. Jannik 
Sinner's straight sets victory over Alexander Zverev made him the first man other than Roger 
Federer and Rafael Nadal to defend his maiden Major title this century. This, perhaps, is the 
clearest sign that the sport has decisively moved on, even as 24-time Slam winner Novak 
Djokovic, the last-man standing from the Big Three era, limped out of the semifinal against Zverev. 
Among women, Madison Keys may have become yet another first-time Major champion, but the 
presence of No.1 Aryna Sabalenka and No.2 Iga Swiatek at the business end shows that the women's 
field is a maturing marketplace, leaving behind the turbulence of the past few years. Sinner's success 
was his third straight in hard-court Slams. Such has been the World No.1's dominance that of the 26 
tournaments he has entered starting from the Toronto Masters in August 2023, he has won 14 and 
finished semifinalist or better in five others. Keys, in contrast, was a bolt from the blue and had last 
reached a Major final at the 2017 US Open. But the fact that the 29-year-old overcame Swiatek in the 
semifinal after erasing a match-point and thwarted Sabalenka in the final despite a stirring comeback 
from the Belarusian made hers a top-drawer performance. 
While Sinner, on current form, appears head and shoulders above the rest of the Tour, he still has to 
contend with Carlos Alcaraz, his generational rival and winner of four Slams. The Spaniard may have 
lost in the quarterfinals to Djokovic, but he handed Sinner three of his six defeats in an otherwise 
sensational 2024 for the Italian. There is, however, a chance that this duel might come to an abrupt halt 
in April when the Court of Arbitration for Sport hears the appeal filed by World Anti-Doping Agency 
against Sinner's acquittal over two failed dope tests (March 2024). Whether this saga gives the likes of 
Zverev and Daniil Medvedev an opening is another thing to watch out for. The two, who looked set to 
take over from the Big Three only to be ambushed by Sinner and Alcaraz, have collectively won just 
one of nine Major finals they have taken part in. Only a title in 2025 will keep them relevant. The 
women's game, which in recent times has traded predictability for novelty, might see the two aspects 
march in tow for the foreseeable future. Sabalenka's consistency, Swiatek's return - Melbourne was 
her best run at a Slam since January 2023 outside the French Open - and Keys' win point in that 
direction. 
T


More and better: On India's educational infrastructure 
India needs good educational infrastructure in all districts 
The Supreme Court of India's ruling that there can be no reservation based on residence in 
admission to PG medical courses is consistent with the constitutional mandate of equality 
before law, but may adversely affect the priorities and health-care requirements of the States. 
The Court has reminded everyone that there is only one 'domicile' for Indians, and that the 
right to seek admissions anywhere in the country must be open to residents of all States. This is in line 
with a series of verdicts on the question whether there can be admissions based on institutional 
preference or residential requirements. The view is that institutional preference, that is choosing 
candidates who had passed out of an institution for admission to PG courses in the same institution, is 
constitutionally permissible; and that admission to UG medical courses can have a residential 
requirement, primarily because the basic medical needs of a region can be better addressed by 
admitting more people from the same background so that doctors emerging from the system would 
render public service there. However, on the principle that higher qualifications brook no compromise 
with merit, the prevailing view is that PG courses should not be open for any such residential preference, 
as the need to attract the best talent is higher. 
Many States do fill up PG seats in government medical colleges, and seats available to them in private 
colleges, barring those that are filled on an all-India basis, with candidates drawn from their own States. 
Candidates from other States can enter PG medical courses in a State only through the national quota. 
This system, now impermissible, has its own justification, as PG students form the backbone of 
medical services in government hospitals. In addition, such students have the additional incentive of 
joining government service and, thereby, acquiring eligibility to apply for PG courses as 'service 
candidates.' The southern States, in particular, have invested heavily in medical education, establishing 
a college in almost every district. These would like to accommodate more candidates from their States to 
keep their medical services going and with an eye on future manpower needs. It is expected that 
aggrieved States may seek a review of this judgment. It is likely that the verdict will result in the Union 
government finding one more way to restrict the role of the States in medical admissions. Interestingly, 
the distinction the Court has made between PG and UG courses when it comes to prioritizing local needs 
may be a sound argument in itself for questioning the continuing tendency to centralize even UG 
admissions across streams. The solution lies in creating educational infrastructure of near-uniform 
quality in every district. 
T