Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 40

Self-perpetuating cycle: On the violence and crisis in Sudan 
Sudan's humanitarian crisis needs the world's attention 
In April 2023, a power struggle between two generals pushed Sudan, which witnessed a revolution 
and a counter-revolutionary coup in the preceding years, into a devastating cycle of violence. The 
conflict has displaced nearly 13 million people, transformed cities, including the capital, Khartoum, 
into war zones, and triggered economic collapse, inducing the world's first officially declared famine 
in four years. More than 1,50,000 people have lost their lives. Yet, the generals, army chief Abdel 
Fattah al-Burhan, and head of the notorious paramilitary Rapid Support Forces (RSF) Mohamed 
Hamdan Dagalo, are not done fighting. Although the army suffered setbacks early in the conflict, it has 
regained ground. Late last month, in a blow to the RSF, Gen. Burhan's forces took control of Khartoum. 
The military controls much of northern and eastern Sudan, including the Red Sea city of Port Sudan, the 
de facto wartime capital. However, the RSF, a potent force, maintains control over much of the western 
Darfur region, where it is currently laying siege to El Fasher, an army stronghold. Recently, the RSF 
declared a parallel government in the areas under its control, seeking to shore up political support. So, 
despite the army's gains, a decisive victory seems far away. 
While the RSF faces credible allegations of large-scale atrocities against civilians, including the rape of 
children, both sides bear responsibility for Sudan's descent into chaos and anarchy. The country hoped 
for a new dawn when mass protests brought down the brutal three-decade dictatorship of President 
Omar al-Bashir in 2019. After his fall, the military and civilian leaders shared power in a transitional 
administration, which was seen as a stepping stone toward full civilian rule. But in 2021, Gen. Burhan, 
then head of the transitional government, refused to hand over power to the civilian leadership. He joined 
hands with Mr. Dagalo, to orchestrate a coup. Their alliance soon collapsed, bringing civil war. For two 
years, the international community largely turned a blind eye, while regional powers supported rival 
factions. The military accuses the UAE of backing the predominantly Arab RSF, while the army gets 
support from Russia, Türkiye, Iran and Qatar. But two years of war is a testament to the fact that there 
can be no military solution. Civilians have endured relentless air strikes by the army, indiscriminate 
attacks and looting by the RSF and a near-total collapse in health care, education and access to food 
and water in the war-hit areas. The world must pay attention to Sudan's humanitarian crisis and push for 
urgent, meaningful talks between the warring factions. What Sudan needs is an immediate ceasefire, 
followed by humanitarian aid so that at least some measure of stability could be restored. 
I


Life unknown: On science and research freedom 
The cosmos holds limitless mysteries for the constrained human mind 
The University of Cambridge issued a press release regarding a paper coauthored by one of 
its scientists that reported an exoplanet called K2-18b may be habitable, with the misleading 
headline, Strongest hints yet of biological activity outside the solar system. The paper, 
published on April 17, 2025, made headlines because astronomers have been interested for 
some time in this exoplanet's peculiar surface physiochemistry. The paper is to its credit 
sedate in its prognostications: the authors have reported detecting the presence of dimethyl 
sulphide or dimethyl disulphide in K2-18b's atmosphere; the former is considered a sign of life 
on the earth and could be on the exoplanet. Independent scientists and the paper's authors have called 
for dispassionate efforts to refine the data and reduce uncertainties as well as to double-check the 
implications. If the history of the search for biomarkers on other planets both within and without the 
solar system is any guide, there is no guarantee that the findings will not be overturned. The cosmos still 
harbours too many mysteries for us to not be surprised by new information awaiting discovery. 
Research of this nature - initiated by curiosity and a pursuit of the unknown - has sometimes been 
overtaken by hype. Unfortunately, it faces another threat today: funding cuts of the type U.S. President 
Donald Trump has unleashed in his country. 
After downsizing or cancelling grants issued via the National Institutes of Health, Mr. Trump began 
holding entire universities hostage: drawdown DEI initiatives and rein in student protests or forgo 
federal funding, he seemed to say. The institutions affected count some of the world's best in their ranks 
and the funding withheld, a non-trivial fraction of that spent on certain subjects worldwide. Earlier this 
month, the White House's budget proposal for the 2026 fiscal revealed its plans to cut National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration funding by 27%, nix most spending for science at NASA's Goddard 
Space Flight Center, and halve NASA's earth-science budget. The essential programme is to control the 
practice and pursuit of science that does not align with Republican state ideology. Curiosity-driven 
research, such as that concerned with the possibility of extraterrestrial life, both proves universities' 
freedom to explore the unknown and fulfils the innate curiosity of humankind. However, the Trump 
government's policies leave whatever research freedom that remains very precious yet also more 
vulnerable to misinformation and ideological capture, and the world itself more short-sighted.