Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 10

Away from home: On the plight of the Indian worker 
There are no easy solutions to the travails of Indian workers abroad 
The story of 16 Indian workers allegedly deceived into working under inhumane conditions in 
Libya highlights the persistent issue of labour exploitation faced by millions of Indians abroad. 
According to government reports, these workers, who had travelled to the United Arab 
Emirates for employment, were later coerced into relocating to Benghazi, Libya, to work in a 
cement factory. While the Indian mission has been providing them with food and supplies, the workers 
cannot leave without the necessary exit permits. This incident is far from isolated. In June, a fire at a 
labour camp in Mangaf, Kuwait, claimed the lives of at least 40 Indians. Prime Minister Narendra Modi's 
recent visit to Kuwait has brought attention to the plight of Indian workers, particularly those in labour 
camps. Despite Mr. Modi's acknowledgment of Kuwait's support for its over one-million-strong Indian 
community, the dangers faced by Indian workers remain a concern. According to the Ministry of External 
Affairs, there are around 13 million Indian nationals abroad, with most in the Gulf countries. These 
workers, who lack eligibility for citizenship in their host countries, contribute significantly to India's 
economy through remittances - about $111 billion in 2022. However, their personal gains are often 
limited. Many are burdened by recruitment fees, loans for travel and relocation, and exploitative work 
conditions such as the kafala system in the Gulf countries. 
The Indian government has made attempts to _______ labour migration. The introduction of the e-Migrate 
system over a decade ago for workers travelling to 18 countries requiring Emigration Clearance (ECR) 
was a step forward. However, labour contractors and agents, operating in international networks, often 
circumvent these safeguards. Moreover, these protections do not extend to non-ECR countries such as 
Israel and Russia, where Indian workers have faced dire consequences, including death in conflict 
zones. Reforming India's Emigration Act, stricter monitoring of recruitment agents, and demanding 
higher compensation guarantees from foreign employers are necessary. Yet, a more sustainable solution 
lies in fostering equitable economic growth in India. Ultimately, in cases like that of the workers in Libya, 
the government is often left with no choice but to repatriate them. However, many return to a bleak 
future. For most, the harsh realities of life overseas still appear preferable. Rather than merely 
celebrating the success of its diaspora, India must use platforms such as the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Sammelan to address the struggles of these workers. Their plight remains in stark contrast to India's 
growing economic and diplomatic ambitions on the global stage. 
T


Positive direction: On India-China talks, ties 
India must ensure greater transparency in talks with China 
The 23rd meeting of the "Special Representatives" (SRs) of India and China - National Security 
Adviser Ajit Doval and Chinese Foreign Affairs Minister and Senior Politburo member Wang Yi 
- was a milestone in the restoration of ties since October this year. Although the meeting of 
SRs is a stand-alone process, meant to look at the broader boundary dispute and resolve 
differences over the 3,500-kilometer-long Line of Actual Control (LAC), it had been paused since the 
military standoff in 2020. There were a few firsts too: the two men meeting in their capacities as SRs 
since 2019, although they have held talks in the interim; such a high-level visit to China and also Mr. 
Doval travelling to Beijing since 2020. This indicates that the decision to hold the SR talks, as mandated 
by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Xi Jinping during talks in Kazan in October, is a signal 
that with only LAC disengagement completed, New Delhi is willing to move ahead on other mechanisms 
for talks with Beijing, without waiting for the next processes of de-escalation and de-induction. The two 
sides have agreed to restart the Kailash-Mansarovar Yatra from India, border trade in Sikkim, and data 
sharing for trans-boundary rivers. Other suspended ties, including direct flights, business and student 
visa liberalization, and journalist exchanges, are also understood to be under discussion. On the 
boundary question, the Doval-Wang talks yielded what the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs termed as 
"six consensuses", and the Ministry of External Affairs referred to as "positive directions" in its release. 
These involve continuing to implement the LAC de-escalation process; revert to the SR process on 
resolving the boundary issue according to the Eleven-articles set out in a 2005 agreement; strengthen 
Confidence Building Measures at the border and cross-border exchanges; enhance coordination of the 
SR process, and the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination on India-China Border 
Affairs to follow up agreements and to hold the next Doval-Wang talks in 2025 in India. 
The optics and the messaging of the SR meeting indicate a certain momentum in re-engagement after 
four years of serious military tensions, and the suspension of regular contact, although bilateral trade 
continued to thrive. The meeting comes just ahead of 2025, that marks 75 years of diplomatic relations, 
and a likely visit to China by Mr. Modi as it hosts the next SCO summit. While restoring the links is 
important, it is necessary to strike a note of caution so that the situation caused by the amassing of 
troops and LAC transgressions by the PLA in 2020 is not repeated. The government must also ensure 
more transparency in its conversations with Beijing over the future steps in normalizing ties, the 
T 

            dismantling of buffer zones, restoration of status quo ante to 2020, and mechanisms for future 
deterrence against aggression at the India-China boundary.