Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 1

Fair share: On Big Tech and media content
Compensation of news publishers by Big Tech platforms is a must 
In a speech on the occasion of National Press Day last week, Union Minister Ashwini Vaishnaw called 
attention to the issue of fair compensation to media companies for the use of their content by big 
technology platforms. The Internet's rapid growth has created a power imbalance between news 
publishers and large online enterprises which now set the financial terms for their use of content created 
by others. Many countries are grappling with this issue, and new regulations are taking shape. In 
Australia and France, Google and Meta are increasingly required to negotiate fairer revenue-sharing 
agreements and licensing deals with publishers. A similar push in India will be an essential step to 
ensure the continued vibrancy and financial sustainability of news organizations, which are under threat 
in their traditional and online formats. The government's affirmation of support for fair revenue sharing in 
favour of news publishers - first expressed last year - is more important than ever. As Artificial 
Intelligence makes stealthy, large-scale appropriation of content easier and when new business models 
are built on that technological capacity, fair compensation for original creators is an urgent question. The 
time has come to rapidly act to give force to these pronouncements through law. The pushback that 
these steps will likely face from Big Tech platforms makes it that much more important to start the work 
quickly, and with resolve. 
The Minister has also expressed concern on the issue of misinformation and fake news. It is important 
for the government to establish trust as a good faith broker and avoid the temptation to act as a regulator 
or censor of content. Trust comes, for instance, by taking steps to improve the public's media literacy in 
general. The government's desire, now stalled  
by the judiciary - to act as a fact-checker - in fact, to be the final authority over what is or is not true 
about the Union government, is not helpful. Trust is established by empowering a strong press to pursue 
and verify falsehoods vigorously; and not by state regulation and censorship. The partisan application of 
existing rules by authorities that go after the Opposition parties on charges of misinformation while 
turning a blind eye towards violations by the ruling party must also stop. Only an even-handed 
application of laws against misinformation will act as a deterrent for bad actors. India's news industry has 
always suffered from fundamental financial and political challenges. The Internet age offers the 

            opportunity to work on remedies. The firms that control the Internet must be more effectively regulated, 
and government interventions, which are necessary, must not result in state high-handedness.


First moves: On the World chess championship 
Gukesh is on the verge of making history in world chess championship 
The World chess championship, which resumes in Singapore on Friday after a break, promises plenty of 
excitement and the possibility of a historic feat. The match between Ding Liren, the defending champion 
from China, and D. Gukesh, the 18-year-old challenger from Chennai, is tied 1.5-1.5 after three games. It 
is played over 14 games and the player who scores 7.5 points will become the champion. If Gukesh 
wins, he will become the youngest World champion in history, which dates back to 1886 when Wilhelm 
Steinitz won the title after beating Johannes Zukertort. The current record belongs to Garry Kasparov, 
who was 22 when he emerged as the World champion in 1985 after conquering fellow-Soviet Anatoly 
Karpov in an epic battle that lasted over a year. Gukesh had begun the World championship as the 
overwhelming favorite: he had been in sparkling form going into the match while Ding had to battle not 
just poor form but, according to his own admission, mental issues as well. Some of the world's top 
Grandmasters had even predicted that Gukesh would win rather easily. But sport has a habit of proving 
predictions wrong, and Gukesh's campaign got off to a disastrous start, as he was outplayed in the first 
game. Ding's win was his first in classical chess in 304 days. 
He played solidly to draw the second game, but in the third, Gukesh showed why he is rated so highly by 
many. He played exceptional chess to post what was his first ever win in classical chess in six meetings 
with Ding. The chess witnessed thus far has been fascinating and there is much to look forward to in the 
remaining 11 games (and the tie-breaks, if required). The match has generated huge interest, not just 
because of Gukesh's potential to break Kasparov's record. This is the first ever World championship 
between two Asians. The first Asian to win the World title was Viswanathan Anand, who is now a mentor 
to Gukesh and to other exciting young talents of Indian chess. It is also a battle between India and 
China, the world's two most populous nations, neighbors and the continent's superpowers. India is 
ranked second in world chess and China third, while among women, China is ranked first and India 
second. But a couple of months ago, India won the gold at the Chess Olympiad in Budapest in both the 
sections. Gukesh had played a key role at the Olympiad, and now he has another opportunity to 
underline India's supremacy in the mind game that is rapidly growing in popularity, especially in India.