Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 14

Letter and spirit: on the Ministry of Education notification 
The new detention policy seeks to address a real issue, but it fails 
mong the key school education reforms instituted by the UPA government as part of the Right 
to Education were Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE) and a 'no detention' 
policy up to Class 8. Both sought to create a benign environment in school so that there was 
no pressure of final examinations and "standards" on the child. The CCE was to be executed from Class 
6, in discrete steps throughout the year, which meant no scary final test of just academic achievement 
based on a year-long curriculum. Whether those reforms contributed to the current situation or not, the 
reality is that a significant number of students passing out of primary school do not have foundational 
numeracy and literacy. And they do not seem to catch up by the time they leave middle school. 
Recognizing the gap in achieving learning outcomes, the NDA government sought to do away with the 
no detention policy, in 2019, leaving it to the appropriate State governments. The CCE was given up too. 
But the COVID-19 pandemic intruded and made it impossible for schools to even consider detaining 
students. The recent notification of the Ministry of Education has removed the discretion given to State 
governments. It has mandated a final examination at the end of Class 5 and Class 8, which will assess a 
child's competence. If he or she is not found to be competent, the child will be re-examined after two 
months after additional instruction. If the child fails again, he or she will be detained. The rules say no 
child should be expelled before completing elementary education. 
Practical necessity is driving this change in norms. Steps do need to be taken to address the gap in the 
learning outcomes achievement. An educated, capable and skilled population is needed to reap the 
demographic dividend. It takes an entire neighbourhood to educate a child, not just the school and 
parents. The dismal situation in learning outcomes is a collective failure of society that needs to be 
addressed. But it would take a lot more than this particular change in policy to trigger a turnaround. 
CBSE-affiliated and other private schools can easily implement the new policy. However, for some 
States, it will be a political hot potato. Private schools should not use this as an excuse to expel poor 
performing students - safeguards would be needed. A sad consequence of the policy is that it brings 
back a single final examination as an arbiter of a child's promotion or detention. While NEET or the JEE 
may be taken as special cases applying to extremely competitive professions, to bring back one final test 
at the school level is a regression. The National Education Policy 2020, for instance, wants to replace 
summative assessment with formative, and promote self and peer assessments. It promises a "holistic, 
A 

            360-degree, multidimensional progress report card" detailing the "progress and the uniqueness of each 
student". The new detention policy does not reflect the NEP's spirit.


Who Moved My Doc 
Traditional medicine can't piggyride on allopathy. It will undermine trust & accountability 
aharashtra FDA must know its directive to retail and wholesale drug dealers - to sell 
allopathic medicines to homeopaths (who've completed a certificate course in 
pharmacology) and service homeopaths' prescriptions of allopathic drugs will be 
challenged in court, as National Medical Council is set to. In this directive, state FDA's 
done an about-turn. Just years ago, it had raided chemists for honouring prescriptions 
from 'cross-party' practitioners. The issue's murky, given Maharashtra govt in an 
ordinance has included ayurveds and homeopaths as 'registered medical practitioners'. NMC contested 
this too but the case is hanging fire in court, almost 10 years on. Judicial delay on such a crucial public 
health matter has allowed for frequent conflict over cross-practice and 'mixopathy', ending up hurting 
patients' interests, eroding trust in healthcare system. This is not to argue that interdisciplinary 
collaboration must not be pursued. 
On the contrary, to service all Indians, high on misinformation and dogmas, and keeping in mind 
accessibility and affordability, certainly traditional medicine systems have roles to play but each in their 
own field. Traditional medicine is an unregulated sector, awash with adulteration and quackery. State 
govts routinely crack down on fraudulent practices - UP alone in one instance banned over 30 'ayurved' 
products found to contain steroids, pain- killers and hypoglycemic agents. Despite a ministry for all non-
allopathy streams of medicine, there's no regulation, code, or licensing system for practitioners. Given 
this, encouraging non-allopathy medicine systems cannot mean homeopathy piggyriding on allopathy, 
two disciplines with vastly contrasting principles. 
Without the rigorous education modern medicine entails, misdiagnoses, incorrect prescriptions, or lack of 
knowledge of adverse drug interactions can put patients at risk. It's a dilution of expertise, undermining 
qualifications of allopathic doctors. At the core of any health-related regulation, or policy has to be patient 
safety, legal clarity and accountability. To that end, FDA's directive can only cause confusion. Retail 
health is at a crossroads with the near-disappearance of the reasonably priced neighbourhood 'general 
physician' the small clinic, everyman's go-to for routine family ailments and relief for chronic conditions. 
As allopathic treatment got almost entirely corporatized, and expensive, that space is largely taken over 
by homeopaths, ayurveds, unani practitioners. In Maharashtra's system, it will be a challenge to hold 
homeopaths accountable for adverse outcomes. Better than cross-prescription, it makes far more sense 
M 

            to create the ecosystem that can encourage collaboration between homeopathy and allopathy without 
overstepping professional boundaries.