Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 54

Fire and ceasefire: on Operation Sindoor and the understanding 
India must not allow third-party meddling in Kashmir 
India and Pakistan on Saturday announced an understanding to stop military actions against each 
other after three days of intense and escalating fighting. It was United States President Donald 
Trump who first made the announcement of a "ceasefire" between the two countries, and in further 
statements, American officials have said U.S. Vice President J.D. Vance and U.S. Secretary of 
State Marco Rubio were in close touch with leaders of both countries including Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi, 'helping" them arrive at this understanding. The current flare-up was caused by 
the terrorist attack on tourists in Pahalgam on April 22. Pakistan has used terrorism as an unstated 
policy. By demonstrating that India can take overt military action against targets in Pakistan in the event 
of a terrorist attack, the Narendra Modi government has effectively announced a new security doctrine. 
Pakistan will not be allowed to hide behind deniability and continue to promote terrorism against 
innocent people. The Indian armed forces performed with stellar courage and professionalism, while 
civilians in Jammu and Kashmir paid a heavy price in terms of lives, peace and property. The people of 
Punjab also had to bear the brunt of the conflict. In the midst of the fire, the Modi government 
underscored a key principle of Indian identity that it is pluralist, multi-religious and democratic, and 
correctly identified Pakistan's strategy to create communal discord in the country. 
Now that a war has been avoided and the conflict been brought to a halt, the Modi government must take 
stock and share its learning with the people of India and their representatives. The Opposition Congress 
has demanded an all-party meeting chaired by Mr. Modi and a special session of Parliament. Several 
other political parties have supported the demand. The Centre can no longer remain silent on key 
questions regarding developments during the operations, the deaths and the losses. Truth cannot be 
allowed to be a casualty in war. Recent days have demonstrated significant new turns in geopolitics 
that have implications for India. China reportedly supported Pakistan's operations. U.S. involvement in 
the conflict between India and Pakistan is nothing new. But the Centre has to clarify the nature of the 
current involvement, as it raises concerns about the internationalisation of the Kashmir dispute. The 
recent days also saw competitive jingoism between the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Congress, 
which is not helpful. The BJP, which is in power, is accountable and it cannot escape that by raising 
historical phantoms. For a country to be able to secure itself and prosper, there must be cool-headed 
thinking among its leaders, domestic political consensus and social harmony, and a respect for 
professional views as opposed to jingoistic slogans.


A belated admission: On the undercount of India's COVID-19 pandemic deaths 
Civil registration data from 2021 points to significant excess deaths 
It has been four years since the delta variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus hit India. The country bore 
the brunt of the pandemic's devastating impact, with harrowing scenes of overwhelmed health-care 
systems, oxygen-supply shortages and even bodies floating in the Ganga in Uttar Pradesh. 
Reports based on data sourced from the Civil Registration System through RTIs and other means, 
by The Hindu in particular, besides independent surveys, showed that the toll was clearly 
staggering and in millions, much more than the official tally. The government's response was 
defensive and dismissive; the attempt was to consistently undermine the findings. After maintaining 
that the reported number of COVID-19 deaths during this period was accurate, the government, through 
the Registrar General of India, released a report last week that showed that there were 21.5 lakh excess 
deaths in 2021 as against 3.32 lakh reported COVID-19 deaths. During a pandemic, the bulk of these 
excess deaths must have been related to the effects of the disease. Besides, lockdown restrictions had 
resulted in lower fatalities due to causes such as road accidents. The high number of excess deaths was 
estimated by The Hindu's calculations to be nearly 6.5 times more than the reported deaths. The fact 
that this multiple was even higher for Gujarat (44.2), Madhya Pradesh (19.5), Uttar Pradesh (19.5) and 
Telangana (18.2) suggests that COVID-19 deaths were under-reported significantly in 2021. These were 
largely due to the fact that deaths due to comorbidities were perhaps not considered as COVID-19 
deaths or because those numbers were suppressed in order to paint a rosier picture of the government's 
response to the pandemic. 
The nearly four-year delay in releasing this report, alongside the Sample Registration System Report for 
2021, reveals the Union government's reluctance to comprehensively assess the pandemic's true impact 
and its casual approach to publishing critical demographic data. This reluctance in publishing timely 
information coincides with the fact that India's civil registration system that tracks births and deaths has 
become more robust over time with most States reporting the bulk of the deaths that occur, either in 
institutions such as hospitals or at homes. In some States, this reporting happens with a lag when 
compared to others, but it is encouraging that registration levels are getting better. But medical 
certification of the causes of the deaths still remains low when compared to other developing countries 
such as Brazil. A robust maintenance of registration and certification records is important for public 
health tools. The delay in release of vital data defeats the purpose of the improvements made in civil 
registration. Data delayed is also data denied. 
I