Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 74

Under control: On the latest inflation data 
Low retail inflation is good news for consumers and policy makers 
pril's 69-month low retail inflation and 13-month low wholesale inflation should come as a 
relief to the public and policymakers alike. For the public, it shows that the easing of prices 
in the first few months of the year is continuing. For policymakers, it goes a step further in 
confirming that last year's alarming levels of inflation are well and truly under control, and 
that the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) was right to cut interest rates twice in a row. The fall in 
retail inflation was driven by a contraction of nearly 11% in vegetable prices, and 5.2% in 
the price of pulses. However, it is important to note that although vegetable prices are lower 
than last year, this contraction is mainly due to a very high base - vegetable inflation was in the 27%-
30% range in the February-April period of last year. Inflation at the wholesale level, too, was driven 
down by easing vegetable prices, which contracted 18.26% in April. This, too, was on a relatively high 
base of nearly 12% last April. The base effect aside, it does look like the government's efforts to bolster 
buffer stocks of essential food items, conduct open market releases, and ease imports during supply 
shortages have helped in easing inflation. The other - less positive - factor could have been the 
liquidity crunch that banks were facing in the first few months of the year. Lower liquidity results in lower 
amounts left to lend, which squeezes money with companies and the public, and thus can lower 
inflation. As things stand, even though retail inflation has been decreasing for six consecutive months, its 
trajectory for the rest of the year will significantly be determined by the monsoon and its vagaries. 
Similarly, the ongoing tariff uncertainty and threats of retaliation by India will also play a part. 
The latest inflation data does have some policy implications. The first and most obvious one is that it 
will likely encourage the RBI's Monetary Policy Committee to cut interest rates again in June. However, 
an important consideration for it will also be how the latest GDP growth data - to be released this month 
end - will look. The other, more immediate step for public sector oil marketing companies is to finally cut 
fuel prices in line with crude oil inflation in the WPI coming in at a 22-month low. If not, then the 
government should officially abandon its dynamic pricing policy, where prices are supposedly revised 
daily. That fuel prices have been virtually unchanged in three years, despite oil prices falling 42% over 
the period, means the policy is a sham in any case.


Danger in the sea: On Kerala and the MSC Elsa 3 sinking 
India's response to maritime disasters must be faster and better 
In the afternoon of May 24, MSC Elsa 3, carrying more than 640 containers, started tilting 
off the coast of Kochi, apparently due to an operational problem. The nearly three-decade-
old ship was said to be structurally safe. The crew abandoned the ship after unsuccessfully 
trying to right her. Now, Elsa 3 is lying at the bottom of the seabed 50 metres below. As per 
the cargo manifest, officials say the ship had 13 containers with hazardous goods. Twelve 
had calcium carbide, a reactive compound, and one had "rubber solution". Some 50 
containers, many empty, were floating and getting tossed around by monsoon weather. 
Officials say the rubber solution has reacted with the seawater and accounts for the plastic pellets being 
found on the Kerala coast. Five containers with calcium carbide, another pollution hazard, are lying on 
the seabed and need to be safely disposed of before they cause damage. Some oil pollution has also 
been reported. There is as yet no clarity on how to safely dispose of the plastic pellets. 
Though containers have tremendously boosted world trade logistics, oversight and control of what each 
container that passes several hands, ships and yards has is a global problem. Besides the 600-odd 
containers still lodged inside Elsa 3's cargo space, some 365 tonnes of heavy fuel oil and 60 tonnes of 
diesel lie inside the ship's tanks. That much of the oil has not seeped out yet is fortuitous but there is 
every possibility of it happening if quick action is not taken. The Chennai coast was ravaged by 250 
tonnes of heavy fuel oil from an oil tanker that collided with an LPG carrier in 2017. MSC Elsa 3 is a toxic 
dump that needs to be quickly disposed of. Salvers are being engaged and they will follow international 
insurance protocols. The National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan (NOS-DCP) names the Coast 
Guard as the nodal agency for such responses. In Chennai, the response was delayed by several days 
and there was much confusion and a lack of coordination between agencies. In Kerala, however, there 
has been enough time to rig up an effective response. With ambitious plans for economic growth that will 
inevitably lead to a surge in ship traffic, the government has also planned to draw more national and 
global trans shipment traffic into India's waters. India is only set to see a great number and variety of 
ships of varying cargoes on its coast in future. The Kerala response will show how well-prepared India is 
to handle a major maritime disaster. 
O