Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 79

Steep decline: On the Index of Industrial Production 
Rural consumption remains poor despite the lowering of inflation 
India's factory output performancemeasured monthly by the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) and 
released by the Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation (MoSPI) slowedto an eight-
month low of 2.7% in April, at the start of fiscal 2026. It also marked a steep decline, almost halving 
from last April's 5.2% growth. This correlates with the monthly gauge of the eight core sectors by 
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, which posted a 0.5% growth in April, also an eight-month 
low. More significantly, it is a steep decline from last April's 6.9%. The eight core sectors make up about 
40% of the weight of items included in the IIP. This comes on the back of a 4% growth in industrial output 
for the last fiscal, which was the lowest in the past four years. Of particular concern is the contraction in 
mining by 0.2%, the first since August 2024. While the absolute valueof mining exports hasrisen in the 
past decade from $25 billion in FY15 to $42 billion in FY25, its share in exports has fallen from 8.1% to 
5.1%. This still constitutes a not-so-insignificant share in India's overall goods exports at a time of great 
trade volatility. However, both manufacturing and power production also slowed to 3.4% (4.2%) and 
1.1% (10.2%), respectively, in April. 
While trade and tariff-related uncertainties are most likely to have impacted goods output, the continuing 
contractionin consumer non-durables' output for the third consecutive month suggestspersistently low 
rural consumption, as essentials such as food make up a significant portion of consumer non-durables. 
This is a clear indication that despite retail inflation hitting an almost 6-year low at 3.16% in April, it has 
not translated into higher spending power for rural communities, where consumer non-durables have the 
most demand. Food prices contracted for the sixth straight month to 2.14%, which led to below MSP 
rates for most staples at mandis. The government must focus on raising rural incomes by implementing 
MSPs for farm produce more systematically. This would aid in increasing rural consumption. However, 
asurgein capital goods output to 20.3% in April, albeit from a low base, indicatesconfidence in the 
domestic economy as investors continue with their plans to diversifyexports, attempting to rely less on 
the U.S. With trade-related sectors expected to continue to stay volatile in the near-term, the Centre 
must push the private sector to increase capital expenditure at home. This will increase incomes, and aid 
in raising consumption demand. Export-oriented sectors must also aim to ring-fence themselves from 
tariff, price and supply chain shocks by ensuring a robust domestic presence, while also diversifying 
outside the traditional export regions of the U.S. and the EU. 
I


Trampled over: On the RCB cup celebration and Bengaluru stampede 
Poor communication and bad policing led to the stampede in Bengaluru 
In less than 24 hours, ecstasy turned into despair. Royal Challengers Bengaluru's (RCB) maiden 
Indian Premier League (IPL) title, secured on Tuesday night (June 3, 2025) in Ahmedabad, 
triggered unabated joy and raucous celebrations in Bengaluru and the rest of Karnataka. However, 
by Wednesday evening (June 4, 2025), a thick shroud of grief hung over the southern metropolis 
as a ghastly stampede in and around RCB's home ground, the M. Chinnaswamy Stadium, left 11 
dead and more than 50 injured. The hallowed venue was hosting a felicitation event in honour of the 
victorious team while fans outside, desperate to get in, ended up as a heaving chaotic mass with many 
gasping for breath. Asphyxia was the primary cause of death besides injuries suffered in the stifling rush. 
Sport is often a tight pact between the performing athlete and the adoring fan; it triggers emotions, and in 
the case of the IPL, forges a connection between the franchise and a vast audience. RCB has always 
had a loyal fan base, and the IPL triumph was bound to attract followers running into lakhs, towards the 
Central Business District of M.G. Road, Brigade Road, Cubbon Road, Queens Road and KSCA 
Clubhouse Link Road. Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah admitted that the crowd was beyond 
expectations. 
However, to use a massive gathering as an explanation for an avoidable accident, is unacceptable. The 
multitude of fans near the Vidhana Soudha, the State legislature, from Wednesday morning (June 4, 
2025) should have compelled the authorities to tighten crowd control protocols. RCB had proclaimed that 
there would be an open-bus parade, but the police clarified that it would not happen. With no access to 
the Vidhana Soudha where the Chief Minister felicitated the players, the frenzied gathering rushed 
towards the stadium for a glimpse of stars such as Virat Kohli. The rumours about the gates being open 
to the public, and the contradictory messages about entry by invitation only, exacerbated the crisis. As 
the venue was packed, gates were closed but fans tried to force their way in. Be it the Karnataka State 
Cricket Association's (KSCA) security or police personnel, staffing was inadequate and a fatal climax 
was inevitable. The State Government, the RCB management, the KSCA and the BCCI have expressed 
their condolences while some have indulged in finger-pointing. The Chief Minister has announced that 
the Bengaluru Police Commissioner and all officials responsible for the jurisdiction where the stadium is 
have been suspended, pending an inquiry. There will also be a judicial inquiry. However, the grim truth is 
that the fan, who drives the commerce of every sport, is the last priority for administrators. Clear 
communication, effective policing and proper advance notice for an event of this scale are all essential or 
else, such tragedies might recur periodically. 
I