Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 114

A slow revival: On the state of India-China ties 
India's decision to restart issuing tourist visas for Chinese nationals is a strong signal that diplomacy 
over restoring ties rent apart by the LAC military standoff and Galwan clash of 2020 is moving 
smoothly. Since Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chinese President Xi Jinping met in Kazan last 
October, there have been a number of high-level meetings; the Working Mechanism for 
Consultation and Coordination on India-China Border Affairs (WMCC) has been convened three 
times. The visa decision comes a month after China reopened the Kailash Manasarovar Yatra 
pilgrimage. The two sides have also agreed in principle to revive direct flights, and it is hoped visas for 
journalists will follow. A joint statement last month said that they would hold "certain functional dialogues" 
to discuss economic issues and trade, presumably to address India's restrictions on Chinese investment, 
and China's export restrictions on fertilizer and critical minerals. The export restrictions are causing 
considerable disruption in Indian technology sector companies, and even Japanese and South Korean 
automotive companies based in India have raised concerns over supply chain issues. The measures are 
expected to continue to roll out as preparations begin for the expected visit of Mr. Modi for the Shanghai 
Cooperation Organisation Summit in August. The WMCC held on Wednesday in Delhi discussed 
preparations for the next meeting of Special Representatives on the China-India boundary question, to 
discuss dispute resolution; China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs says that it is speaking to India about New 
Delhi's concerns over the mega-dam project on the Brahmaputra (Yarlung Tsangpo) in Tibet.  
However, both sides have been muted about the reason for the rupture in ties in the first place. There 
has been little discussion over what prompted the Chinese PLA to transgress the LAC in 2020, which led 
to the Galwan clash, and what guarantees Beijing has given that this would not be repeated. While in 
December 2024, the government told Parliament that normalcy in ties could only follow the restoration of 
"peace and tranquility in the border areas", it appears it is now prepared to continue to normalize other 
parts of the relationship without achieving troop de-escalation, dismantling of infrastructure in disputed 
areas and buffer zones that would lead to restoring patrolling to pre-2020 levels. Ties have also been 
impacted over Operation Sindoor, with revelations that the PLA was in lock-step with Pakistan's army. 
The government must realise that restoring mechanisms of bilateral ties are not by themselves sufficient 
for rebuilding trust. Sweeping key issues under the carpet, without some transparency on the path 
ahead, could put the whole process of reviving relations at risk. 
I


Promising compromise: on the India-United Kingdom Comprehensive Economic 
and Trade Agreement 
India-U.K. trade deal may set the template for the EU and U.S. deals 
The India-United Kingdom Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), signed 
by the two countries on Thursday, is a good example of the give and take between two large 
economies of comparable size. While the U.K. has agreed to provide India duty-free access to 
about 99% of its tariff lines, it has been more conservative when it comes to the movement 
of professionals. It has set an annual quota of just 1,800 visas for niche professional roles 
such as yoga instructors and classical musicians, and the agreement falls short of making 
commitments on broader visa categories such as business visitors or IT professionals. This 
was something India had been keen on. On the other hand, while India has opened about 90% of its 
tariff lines for duty-free import from the U.K., it has kept key agricultural products such as dairy products, 
apples, oats, and edible oils out of the deal - key demands of the U.K. Similarly, while India has 
committed to reducing duties on automobile imports by a substantial 100 percentage points over time, 
these are subject to a graded quota over the next decade, which gives the domestic industry time to 
adjust. A sign of a good deal is when both sides walk away happy but not satisfied. In any case, such 
bilateral deals should not be viewed as a zero-sum game where one side's loss is another's gain.  
Enhancing bilateral trade is in both countries' interests, especially at a time when the world's biggest 
trading powers are raising tariff and non-tariff barriers. The U.K. is a relatively small trading partner for 
India, but therein lies ample scope for growth. While at a macro scale the gains might initially be limited, 
the sector-wise increases have the potential to be significant. Sectors such as agriculture, textiles, 
leather and chemicals are all set to see quick gains. There is potential for longer term benefits too. The 
U.K. is a major gateway to Europe, which is a much bigger trading partner of India's. Goods destined for 
Europe could be routed through the U.K., and the duty-free arrangement will likely enhance this flow.  
Companies in other countries that already export to the U.K. will also start viewing India more 
favourably as an investment destination so as to take advantage of the duty-free access. It is now up to 
the government to help Indian exporters scale up and compete internationally. Another important 
consideration is that such a deal sets the template for future ones. The general trend is that the bigger 
the economy being negotiated with, the bigger the concessions given. The United States and the 
European Union will now want more from India than what it has conceded to the U.K.