Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 20

Growth chill: On the economy 
The economy's sputtering engines necessitate urgent fiscal actions 
The National Statistics Office (NSO) has confirmed emerging fears about the economy's 
evidently sluggish trajectory through this year in its first Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
estimates for 2024-25. While the election-focused first quarter hit public capital spending, the 
second quarter (Q2) was marred by weak demand and still underwhelming public capex, 
dragging GDP growth to a seven-quarter low of 5.4%. The Centre and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), 
which were projecting that India would log a fourth year of 7%-plus growth, had pared their hopes to 
'about 6.5%' and 6.6%, respectively. This was predicated on a bump-up of about 7% in the second half 
of the year to offset the first half's 6% rise. The NSO, slightly less sanguine, expects GDP to grow at a 
four-year low pace of 6.4%, from 8.2% in 2023-24, with just agriculture seen rising significantly faster 
than last year. Manufacturing and mining growth may virtually halve, and though services sectors seem 
relatively better off, there is some concern of momentum loss. Purchasing Managers' Indices averaged 
lower than Q2 through Q3, for both manufacturing and services. The NSO expects private consumption 
to rebound 7.3% this year from just 4% last year. But Q3 trends do not indicate a significant lift-off in 
urban demand. So, this could be a tad optimistic despite inflation easing slightly since October. 
The Finance Ministry has sought to link the demand slowdown to a "combination of monetary policy 
stance and macroprudential measures by the central bank". Slow wage growth has also been blamed for 
cramped household demand. The NSO's projection of gross fixed capital formation growth slipping to 
6.4% this year from 9% in 2023-24 indicates that private capex - that is contingent on domestic and 
global demand - remains weak while public capex goals are unlikely to be met. Of course, these early 
NSO projections are largely conjured up for informing the Union Budget formulation, and some upgrades 
may happen later, but most economists see significant downside risks for now. Nomura economists, for 
instance, who have been arguing that India is in the grip of a cyclical slowdown for a while, reckon 
growth will end up around 6%, implying a flat-lined second half. With the global outlook also shrouded in 
uncertainty, winter seems to be here for India's economy. How far behind spring lags will depend on 
policymakers' actions, and inactions. The Union Budget 2025-26 needs to move from incremental 
tinkering to tailoring reforms and fiscal actions that can bring India's growth back to the 7% mark, if not 
8%, at the earliest. If that entails some hard calls such as slashing income, fuel and consumption taxes, 
along with import tariffs, so be it. Just pining for interest rate cuts will not suffice anymore. 
T


Indians abroad: On the 18th edition of the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 
Absence of opportunities remains the main driver of migration 
At the inauguration of the 18th edition of the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) last week, Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi described the Indian diaspora as India's "ambassadors to the world", having 
"seamlessly assimilated" into the local society, served the community, and contributed to India's growth 
and prosperity. The strength of the India-origin community worldwide of over 35 million - about 15.85 
million NRIs and 19.57 million PIOs, who are foreign nationals - is their ability to adapt and thrive in 
different fields, including in politics, where Indian-origin people have become leaders of more than 30 
other countries. Where they retain their Indian passports, the diaspora is known for its distinguished 
services in many professional spheres. The PBD's purpose is to celebrate this success and discuss 
issues of importance; President Droupadi Murmu handed out about 27 Pravasi Bharatiya Samman 
awards. The event, which was first held in 2003, is organized around January 9, when Mahatma Gandhi 
returned to India from South Africa in 1915. The latest event, held in Bhubaneswar, Odisha, brought 
more than 3,000 delegates from across 70 countries, with much of the focus on how the diaspora can 
help in developing India (Viksit Bharat programme). 
The achievements of the Indian diaspora are, no doubt, a matter of pride for all Indians, but it is 
important that the event is not limited to a simple self-congratulatory or laudatory exercise. The issues 
for the diaspora, particularly for those who are still Indian nationals, are more acute now. The increase 
in far-right populist governments, particularly in the West, is making visa and entry conditions for 
Indians more difficult, and it is important for the government to address such issues. Intractable global 
conflicts, especially in West Asia where more than nine million Indians live and work, are also putting 
lakhs of Indians in peril, and the PBD engagement would benefit from discussions between the 
community on how best to increase awareness and enhance safeguards for them. Given the broad 
spread of the diaspora, it is necessary to ensure that India's ties with its diaspora be inclusive, and non-
partisan on political issues. Recent actions by the government to deny or revoke OCI cards for those 
perceived to be critical of the government bely this necessity. Above all, it is important to acknowledge 
that one of the biggest drivers of Indians migrating is the lack of economic opportunities within India. 
While there are no easy fixes for this, the loss to India of some of its most talented people must be 
counted, even as the country celebrates their incredible success and impact on the global stage.