Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 8

Trade shocker: On November's trade estimates 
November's low tally scuppers expectations of a recovery in goods exports 
This October's foreign trade numbers had offered a sliver of hope for India's generally weak 
export story over the past couple of years, as goods exports grew at a 28-month high pace of 
17.2%. Any prospects of a sustained turnaround with better global demand for this Christmas 
season, have, however, come undone with November's trade estimates released on Monday. In 
a double whammy of sorts, not only did the value of outbound shipments sink to the lowest in a little over 
two years at just $32.1 billion but the import bill also hit a record high of $70 billion, rising 27% year-on-
year which is the fastest uptick in more than two years as well. Relative to October, goods exports were 
18.1% lower. Three of the last four months have now clocked record-breaking import bills, with $64.3 
billion in August and $66.3 billion in October. As in August, November's import bill spike was led by gold 
imports that jumped 331.5% from last November to a whopping $14.9 billion. Overall gold imports are 
now up 49% this year, and while higher prices and seasonal spikes for the festive and wedding season 
explain some of the uptick, this warrants some examination, especially as exports of gems and jewellery 
are sputtering, including in the employment-intensive businesses such as diamond polishing and gold 
ornaments. Gems and jewellery exports are down 10.2% between April and November, while imports 
have widened over 30%, with November seeing a record high deficit of $14.4 billion in the segment. 
The overall gap in merchandise trade also expanded to a fresh high of $37.8 billion in November, 
perhaps the first time that the deficit is higher than the export tally. Apart from precious metals, petroleum 
also played a key part in this widening, with exports halving to $3.7 billion while imports rose 7.9% to 
$16.1 billion. Officials have sought to downplay concerns by linking the export slump to lower oil prices, 
but the same should also hold true for imports. It may well be that the discount gains on Russian oil India 
had capitalized on to ramp up its exports, are fading, and domestic demand is stronger than before, but 
economists are a tad puzzled at this phenomenon of recent months. The Commerce Ministry top brass 
has often argued that rising import bills are not a worry because India is growing faster than the world, 
much of the imports are directly correlated to, or are inputs for exported goods, and non-oil exports that 
are rising should remain the focus. But oil and jewellery remain among India's top tradables, and 
policymakers must glean a better sense of the dynamics behind this tumult, even if they are unfazed by 
the expanding trade deficit. 
T


Warding off fire: on hospital fires 
There should be no slackening in fire safety norms in hospitals 
here is no greater betrayal than when a sanctuary turns into a death trap. Fire accidents in 
hospitals that kill the vulnerable would fall squarely in this category. A massive fire that broke 
out at City Hospital, an orthopaedic specialty unit in Dindigul in south Tamil Nadu, last week 
caused the death of six people, including a child and two women. All the victims were trapped in 
the hospital lift and initial reports suggested they died of suffocation. Only one of the six persons, who 
was on a wheelchair, was an in-patient at the hospital; all the others were visitors. They were trapped, 
over half an hour, in the lift as the smoke poured in through the vents, all escape routes sealed. The fire, 
which reportedly started as a short circuit in the ground floor, swept up to the first floor, and smoke soon 
curled up to all the floors in the four-storey building, affecting patients. Initially, smoke was noticed in the 
outpatient department, after patient files caught fire. In response, the power supply was shut down, but 
six persons still entered the lift at the ground floor. In the melee that ensued, no one paid any attention to 
the lift, stuck in between two floors. Meanwhile, patients on the higher floors struggled to breathe, but for 
many, because of mobility issues, there was no opportunity to escape. Thirty-two patients were shifted to 
the nearby Dindigul government hospital for further treatment and three of them needed ventilator 
support. 
The rash of fire accidents in hospitals in India, in recent times, and the lives lost are uncanny reminders 
that hospital infrastructure upkeep, in the private or public health-care sector, is astonishingly low priority 
across the country. One month ago, on November 15, 10 newborns died in a fire in Maharani Laxmi Bai 
Medical College and Hospital, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh. In May this year, seven newborns were killed in 
New Born Baby Care Hospital, a private facility in East Delhi, after a fire broke out there. It is 
unconscionable that, as a nation, India pays little attention to fireproofing its hospitals, making sure all 
equipment in hospitals and the hospitals themselves are ready to act and limit damage if, and when, a 
mechanical fault was to cause a fire. The government should ensure that periodic renewal of fire licences 
stops being a travesty. Existing government fire safety regulations must be followed implicitly and 
spiritedly, without any slacking, with respect to hospitals and public places. If a hospital ever gets into the 
news, it must be for its healing prowess, not for being a towering inferno. 
T