Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 91

Vaccinating India: On zero-dose children 
The prevalence of zero-dose children remains high among the poor 
In the bright side, vaccine coverage globally, between 1980 and 2023, doubled for six 
diseases including measles, polio and tuberculosis. Also, at 75% globally, there has been 
a sharp fall in the number of zero-dose children - those who have not received the first 
dose of the diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DTP) vaccine - during the same time 
period. The number of zero-dose children is a crucial performance marker and an indicator 
of vaccination coverage inequities. Despite increased immunization coverage over the decades, in 2023, 
at 1.44 million, India, according to The Lancet, still had the second largest number of zero-dose children, 
and is among the eight countries with over 50% of the nearly 16 million zero-dose children globally. Most 
of the zero-dose children globally are in countries that are conflict-affected or with limited resources for 
vaccination programmes - India has neither of the two problems. However, about 23 million babies 
were born in 2023 in India, the highest in the world; in 2024, China, which has the second highest 
number of newborns globally, reported just 9.5 million newborns. Though the number of zero-dose 
children is staggering, when seen in the context of the number of newborns in 2023, the percentage of 
zero-dose children in India is 6.2%. A study in 2021 found that India had sharply reduced the percentage 
of zero-dose children, from 33.4% in 1992 to 10.1% in 2016. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, the 
number of zero-dose children was 1.4 million in 2019 but this swelled to 2.7 million in 2021 and then 
dropped to 1.1 million in 2022 before increasing to 1.44 million in 2023. 
As in the 2021 study, a large percentage of zero-dose children are in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and Gujarat. There is also a relatively high proportion of them in 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. Over the years, the difference in zero-dose 
children based on gender, caste, and rural-urban status has reduced substantially. However, prevalence 
remains high among the poor, mothers with low education, Scheduled Tribes and Muslims. Focus is 
needed to immunize children in hard-to-reach tribal areas, urban slums where there is a huge migrant 
population, and in reducing vaccine hesitancy among Muslim households with newborn children. India 
has much work to do to meet WHO's Immunization Agenda 2030 (IA2030) - halving zero-dose children 
relative to 2019. With the number of zero-dose children in 2023 (1.44 million) only about nearly reaching 
the 2019 level of 1.4 million, India needs greater and sustained efforts to halve this number in the next 
five years. 
O


Nuclear spectre: On the risk of an era of nuclear brinkmanship 
Israeli and U.S. actions against Iran amount to nuclear brinkmanship 
fter a 12-day intense missile barrage and air attacks following Israel's illegal aerial attacks 
on Iran, the two countries finally announced a ceasefire on Tuesday (June 24, 2025). 
Ostensibly conducted as a "pre-emptive" strike on Iran's nuclear facilities, the Israeli attacks 
graduated into a full-fledged war that also involved U.S. strikes on Iranian nuclear 
installations. These attacks, in blithely ignoring the dangers of radioactive leakage, and their 
subsequent responses, point to the stark nature of a fragile international order now threatened by 
escalating nuclear risks from West Asia to Ukraine and even the Indian subcontinent. The attacks on Iran 
might have damaged its nuclear installations and, in particular, its uranium enrichment capabilities. Yet, 
this naked aggression was against a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and a 
country that had willingly subjected its facilities to international scrutiny. Iran had also signed the Joint 
Comprehensive Plan of Action with the P5+1 (nuclear-armed states plus Germany) to ensure that its 
nuclear capabilities remained peaceful, only for it to be rendered meaningless after the U.S. withdrew 
from it during President Donald Trump's first term. These attacks now create a new dynamic, wherein 
Iran is compelled to seek nuclear weapons by withdrawing from its commitments - its parliament is now 
mulling a bill to exit the NPT - and use them as a deterrent. Meanwhile, any step Iran takes to do so 
could be used to justify further aggression by Israel and the U.S., thereby rejecting international laws and 
the NPT's nonproliferation norm. 
Israel's hypocrisy is stark. It remains a non-signatory to the NPT and refuses any oversight of its 
undeclared, but known, arsenal. This raises the possibility that it values nuclear weapons not for 
deterrence but for their destructive potential. U.S. protection emboldens it to pursue destructive policies 
in Gaza and illegal wars in West Asia. Combined with the Russian threat to use nuclear weapons to 
deter conventional aggression by NATO following its Ukraine invasion, these actions reveal how the 
renewed "competition among the great powers" and their cynical understanding of deterrence are 
dismantling global stability. The idea of nuclear disarmament is in tatters as the nuclear-weapon states 
continue to expand and modernize their arsenals, while non-proliferation is under threat as other 
countries turn to nuclear weapons to safeguard themselves. Without a renewed diplomatic impetus to re-
establish international norms on conflict, a stronger push for disarmament among all nuclear-armed 
states, and a firm commitment to uphold the NPT, the world risks sliding into a new era of nuclear 
brinkmanship that could prove more dangerous than the Cold War's darkest moments. 
A