Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 116

Buried in rubble: On the Afghanistan earthquake 
Earthquakes need not be deadly if building codes are followed strictly 
fghanistan reeled on Monday (September 1, 2025) in the wake of a strong earthquake and 
multiple after-shocks, killing over 1,400 people, and injuring at least 3,100. According to the 
United States Geological Survey, the primary tremor was an earthquake of magnitude 6.3 
and had struck near Jalalabad, Nangarhar province. After the first tremor, of magnitude 6.3, 
at a depth of eight kilometres, another earthquake, of magnitude 4.7, struck around 140 km 
from the epicentre of the initial tremor. The impact of the disaster is playing out in the Kunar 
and Nangarhar provinces where rescue efforts are on to find and extricate survivors and 
locate bodies that are buried under piles of rubble. What makes the salvage operations particularly 
challenging are the limited resources available to authorities given that the ruling Taliban regime faces 
multiple sanctions. This has been particularly stark following the withdrawal of the United States from 
Afghanistan in 2021. The United Nations and international humanitarian agencies have voiced their 
condolences and expressed support to aid the wounded and assist with relief operations. 
Afghanistan, which abutsthe Hindu Kush mountains, and is at the junction of the Indian and Eurasian 
tectonic plates, livesunder the constant threat of an earthquake. Since 1900, there have reportedly been 
12 earthquakes with a magnitude greater than 7 in north-east Afghanistan. In October 2023, the western 
Herat province was devastated by an earthquake of magnitude 6.3, and several aftershocks, which killed 
more than 1,500 people and damaged or destroyed more than 63,000 homes. Given the vulnerability of 
the region, it also bears out that earthquakes of this magnitude and epicentre-depth cause much less 
damage to lives and property in several parts of the world. Delhi, in February 2025, reported a quake of 
magnitude 4, at a relatively shallow - and, therefore, potentially more devastating - depth of five 
kilometres below the surface. True, a quake of magnitude 6 is roughly 100 times more powerful than a 
one of magnitude 4 assuming similar depths of origin, but there was no physical damage at all reported 
anywhere in Delhi. At the other end, Chile is regularly besieged by quakes greater than a magnitude of 
6, with all accounts suggesting minimal infrastructural damage and no attributable casualties. This is due 
to the country's focused commitment to enforcing building codes. Earthquakes need not be a death 
sentence and Afghanistan must take decisive steps to strengthen its building codes and work to spread 
awareness on their enforcement. 
A


Renewed focus: On India-Japan ties 
India and Japan showed that their ties were stable amid a global churn 
In the first leg of his tour East, Prime Minister Narendra Modi travelled to Japan for a two-
day visit for the 15th Annual Summit with Japanese Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba before 
moving to Tianjin to attend the SCO Summit. The last summit, in India, was in 2022. The 
two sides issued at least a dozen documents, aimed primarily at updating their agreements 
and giving them a "Next-Gen" focus. Japanese businesses have raised their investment 
targets in India to $68 billion and signed about 170 MoUs with Indian partners. Apart from the Joint 
Statement, there was a 2035 Vision Statement, including eight areas of cooperation such as economic 
security, mobility and green technology transition. A "Next-Gen State-Prefecture Partnership" highlighted 
grassroot-level ties and a boosting of direct flight connectivity. India and Japan updated their 2008 
Security partnership to include an annual NSA-level dialogue, more engagement over the Quad, Indo-
Pacific cooperation and UN Security Council reform. Of interest is their Economic Security Partnership 
goal to build resilient supply chains and secure critical infrastructure, using Japanese technology to help 
manufacture and process semiconductor technology in India, as Indian companies face Chinese 
restrictions on the export of rare earth magnets. Japan's collaborationwith India's High Speed Rail 
"Bullet Train" project wasshowcased, with Mr. Modi and Mr. Ishiba travelling to Miyagi province by train, 
where they also inspected a semiconductor factory. The joint statement included strong language 
condemning North Korea's missile tests and nuclear programme, and the Pahalgam attack and cross-
border terrorism, albeit without mention of Pakistan. The leaders also stressed the importance of the 
upcoming Quad Summit of leaders in India this year, which has come under a cloud over Mr. Trump's 
actions against India. 
While the textof the India-Japan meetings waslargely bilateral, the subtext was geopolitical. Mr. Modi 
flew to Tokyo in the wake of the massive American tariffs which threaten to upturn the Indian economy. 
He also chose to make Japan his first stop before his talks with Chinese President Xi Jinping on Sunday 
(August 31, 2025) towards normalizing relations after a four-year standoff. Japan too is concerned 
about the situation in the East China Sea, and has tensions over trade with the U.S., which led it to 
cancel a trade negotiation team visit to Washington. The messagethat Mr. Modi and Mr. Ishiba sent out 
wasthat amidst geopolitical turmoil caused by global powers, the India-Japan relationship remains 
stable and continues to grow. 
O