Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 59

A voluntary mandate: On the APAAR student ID 
The APAAR ID should not be imposed without a law in place 
The introduction of an Automated Permanent Academic Account Registry (APAAR) ID by the 
Ministry of Education, to digitize the academic transcripts of every student, aims to ensure a 
"single source of truth" for all their records throughout their life in the academic ecosystem in 
India. Linked with Aadhaar, APAAR is far from the first such step towards a rapid digitization of 
school records in India: since the implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020, 
education authorities have pushed the Unified District Information System for Education Plus 
(UDISE+) and the Student Database Management Information System. While these radically 
novel technocratic overhauls of record-keeping are one thing, the blatantly unlawful ways in which 
they are being pushed on parents and wielded as weapons at the State level are quite another. The 
description of APAAR as unlawful is no mere interpretation: the Education Ministry's website is clear 
that the programme is not mandatory, with no law mandating its usage. But schools and district 
education administrators do not seem to be operating within that reality. 
In Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka, schools have been given an ___________target: 100% "saturation," or 
complete enrolment of all students. In their fervour to attain this target, schools have warned parents of 
consequences in the event of non-enrolment, and State education authorities have rattled their sabres at 
religious minority institutions and even at fellow administrators, alleging a mismatch of enrolment data 
between APAAR and existing records. In the initial days of what has now been rechristened as Digital 
Public Infrastructure (DPI), the government had similarly been all too keen to propagate Aadhaar and 
services such as Digi Yatra to an unsuspecting (and too often non-consenting) public, achieving such 
broad coverage that a formal mandate later becomes a fait accompli. All-too-familiar issues such as 
name mismatches, leading to failure of enrolment, have also emerged. It is important for informed 
consent to be the bedrock of any DPI. Else, it risks being mandated de facto. Collecting and digitizing 
this data - with tall claims of security and convenience - should be alarming when the Digital Personal 
Data Protection Act, 2023 has yet to take effect. More importantly, the Supreme Court of India has ruled, 
in its right to privacy judgment, that Aadhaar cannot be mandated for basic education. APAAR is an ill-
disguised proxy that steers clear of the text - but not the spirit - of that judgment. If the government 
wishes to undertake the goal of improving the reliability and accessibility of education records, it should 
back its administration of that effort with legislation.


A jab in time: On India and vaccination against flu 
India must push for vaccination against the flu for the elderly 
ith recent reports indicating a rise in the seasonal influenza cases in the Delhi-NCR 
area, it is once again time to issue a cautionary note and make a renewed effort to 
push adult vaccination in the country. The predominant strains involved this season 
are Influenza A and Influenza B, many treating physicians and pulmonologists have 
reported. Influenza, with the moniker flu, is a contagious respiratory illness caused 
by viruses. While it is routinely conflated with the common cold, since the symptoms 
present similarly - sudden cough and sore throat, with high fever, accompanied by 
muscle pain, body aches, headaches, fatigue and stuffy nose - it is not quite the same. Both are 
caused by different viruses and can have varying symptoms and severity. The flu causes mild to serious 
illness, requiring hospitalisation sometimes, and in a few cases, mostly coinciding with a delay in 
hospitalisation, can even lead to death. In India, there are two peaks of seasonal influenza, one from 
January to March and the other in the latter part of the southwest monsoon, in August-October. India has 
developed a near real time surveillance of cases of Influenza like Illness (ILI) and Severe Acute 
Respiratory Infections (SARI) presenting themselves in health facilities. This programme was further 
strengthened and made more robust during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. There is also real time 
surveillance through the country-wide network of diagnostic laboratories. Epidemiologists say influenza 
surveillance is a key tool to keep tabs on circulating strains, and define seasonality, besides, playing an 
important role in syncing vaccination with relevant circulating strains. With all this information in place, it 
is highly unlikely that health managers will miss any seasonal uptick of cases. 
However, the task at hand for governments is a little more complex - it is about being prepared to 
handle the outbreak by anticipating it and inculcating a sense of preservation, particularly among the 
high-risk groups ranging on the extremes of the age spectrum. Attention should be paid to children, 
senior citizens and people with chronic respiratory conditions. Key among the interventions 
recommended is increasing awareness on vaccination for influenza; in fact, people of all ages will benefit 
from a periodic shot of the updated flu vaccine. While vaccination for children is, by and large, 
acceptable, and an area of focus for all health managers, adult immunization gets the short shrift. At the 
moment, it is left to the whims and resources of State governments to offer adult vaccinations. Targeted 
awareness campaigns must be clear, urgent in tone, and make an impact on the high-risk groups 
particularly, because, very simply, vaccines save lives. 
W