Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 55

New opportunity: On a reset in India-Canada ties 
India and Canada can discuss a reset in ties after new Prime Minister takes over 
The newly elected leaderof Canada's ruling Liberal Party, Mark Carney, who is now Prime 
Minister-designate, hasa tough task ahead in what is expected to be a short period of time. 
Mr. Carney, who is set to take over from Justin Trudeau when he formally steps down this 
week, willalmost immediately face a confidence vote in Parliament, after it reconvenes on 
March 24. Federal elections in Canada are due in October 2025, but observers say Mr. Carney 
could call for snap polls first, hoping to ride a surge of unexpected popularity for the Liberal 
Party for standing up to threats made by the U.S. President Donald Trump since he took office. Mr. 
Trump has consistently targeted Mr. Trudeau, suggesting that Canada would be better off as the "U.S.'s 
51st State", and has been threatening to impose a slew of tariffs, accusing Canada of unfair duties as 
well as allowing fentanyl drugs and immigrants across the border. Canada has threatened counter-tariffs, 
and is considering a 25% surcharge on electricity exports to the U.S., with Mr. Carney claiming that "in 
trade, as in hockey, Canada will win". Mr. Carney, who is unelected and not a traditional politician, 
willhave to convince voters of his ability to ensure that, as he takes on his rival, Conservative Party 
leader Pierre Poilievre, who has been far ahead in the polls until recent weeks. To that end, Mr. Carney's 
non-political skills will come handy. He was an economist and a central bank Governor; that he was not a 
member of the Trudeau cabinet means that he is free of any taint from its actions. 
The exitof Mr. Trudeau iscause for relief for India, and an opportunity to reset ties that have been on ice. 
His intemperate decisionto name "Indian government agents" and then expel Indian diplomats, 
implicating them in a purported plot to kill Khalistani activist Hardeep Singh Nijjar, without proffering 
any proof, wasa miscalculation and diplomatic blunder. The actions, seen in comparison to more 
discreet dealing by the U.S. in a linked case, sentIndia-Canada ties to their lowest ebb since the 1980s. 
It is significant that India is considering restoring a High Commissioner to Ottawa, while Canada is 
sending its intelligence chief to a conference in Delhi. Mr. Carney and Mr. Poilievre have made it clear 
that they would like to rework the relationship with India, and there will be opportunities to do so, 
particularly in education, investment and trade, all of which have taken a back seat after the violence 
and schisms within India's diaspora community, and its supporters in Canada's government. The 
interlude is also a fitting period for New Delhi to consider how it wishes to take ties forward. Regardless 
of the change in leadership, the Khalistan issue cannot be wished away, and requires sustained, 
considered diplomacy and respect for each other's concerns, while ensuring India's national security 
priorities.


Welcome gesture: On the ECI and interaction with political parties 
The Election Commission of India's changed approach to engaging with critics is a 
good move 
The initiative by the newly appointed commissioners of the Election Commission of India 
(ECI) to invite political party representatives and leaders for an interaction to "strengthen 
electoral processes" is a welcome move. The move was precipitated by the rising 
complaints and grievances raised by the Opposition relating to voter registration and 
turnout, and other matters concerning the conduct of elections. The ECI has also asked 
parties to submit suggestions on issues concerned besides instructing provincial officials to 
interact with party representatives on a regular basis. In the recent past, the ECI had taken 
an unusually aggressive posture in responding to the Opposition's complaints, which included being 
dismissive of genuine grievances such as undue delays in publishing voter turnout figures and even 
going on to admonish its critics. Such gestures only deepened distrust among political parties. While 
the Opposition has sown so much doubt on issues such as the functioning of the Electronic Voting 
Machine, resulting in an atmosphere of scepticism seeping into the minds of a majority of voters, the 
ECI could also have done more to reassure voters about the robustness of the electoral process 
related to electronic voting. Other legitimate issues, which include regulation of campaigns, action 
against hate speech, and the timing of elections at various levels also need a thoroughgoing review, and 
the ECI must be receptive to the critique of its functioning on these issues. There is also the question of 
the constitution of the ECI and the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner, but that is a matter 
now in the hands of the Supreme Court. 
One of Indian democracy's most salient features since Independence has been the ECI's evolution and 
its autonomous role in the conduct of periodic elections, leading to increased voter participation and 
more faith in electoral democracy. This conduct, as the processes evolved, has emphasized 
transparency, accountability, and the clear and robust release of relevant and verifiable information 
related to elections. While the Electors Photo Identification Card issue related to duplicate numbers for 
voters across States is largely trivial - as the ECI has averred - the more serious issues related to 
voters being registered in different polling locations require to be rectified. The ECI must also ensure a 
level playing field during campaigns so that there is no undue advantage for the ruling party - a 
grievance widely expressed by Opposition forces across States. Regular interactions with political party 
representatives and a clear release of verifiable information will go a long way in allaying fears about the 
tried and tested electoral process in the country.