Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 77

Stories from the heart: On Banu Mushtaq winning the International Booker for Heart Lamp 
Banu's Booker will help regional languages gain global recognition 
The marginalised have come to the fore with Banu Mushtaq winning the International Booker 
Prize for 2025. In a first for Kannada, Mushtaq and her translator Deepa Bhasthi walked away 
with the top honours on Tuesday night (May 21, 2025) in London for Heart Lamp. This is also 
the first time in the history of the prize that a collection of short stories has won. Breaching 
walls, breaking ceilings, and enduring angry outbursts, Mushtaq chronicles the lives of Muslim 
women and their anxieties. Her stories are also peopled by clueless husbands, children who are like 
"monkeys without tails", loving and, sometimes overbearing, grandmothers, muscular brothers and 
maulvis. But as Mushtaq has said in interviews, the narratives are primarily about women and how 
"religion, society, and politics demand unquestioning obedience from them, and in doing so, inflict 
inhumane cruelty upon them". She writes with candour and wry humour, even as the women are often 
struggling to stay afloat with their backs against the wall. In her moving acceptance speech, Mushtaq 
harped on the power of words to "create a world where every voice is heard, every story matters, and 
every person belongs". 
Showering praise on Kannada, she said that it is a language that sings of resilience and nuance - "to 
write in Kannada is to inherit a legacy of cosmic wonder and earthly wisdom". The 77-year-old Mushtaq 
hails from Hassan in Karnataka, like another illustrious writer, Raja Rao, who wrote in Kannada, English 
and French. Mushtaq, a lawyer and activist, was inspired to write after hearing of the "pain, suffering, and 
helpless lives" of the women she interacted with. The "radical translation" by Bhasthi was praised by the 
Jury chair Max Porter who said it "ruffles language to create new textures in a plurality of Englishes". 
Heart Lamp's Booker, just three years after Geetanjali Shree won for Tomb of Sand, should open doors 
for India's rich regional languages to gain a wider readership. Mushtaq follows a trail of writers such as 
Perumal Murugan, Vivek Shanbhag, Bama, Jayant Kaikini, M. Mukundan and S. Hareesh who observe 
the human condition in a socio-political context with their translators ensuring the rhythms of the original 
language are not lost. In a world that often tries to divide people, Mushtaq said that literature remains 
one of the "last sacred spaces where we can live inside each other's minds if only for a few pages". It is 
the only place that can embrace stories from unheard corners and translations that defy borders.


Tough timing: on ISRO PSLV-C61 mission, India's space programme 
ISRO needs more resources to support India's military needs 
In contemporary spaceflight, cost, reliability and time form a tense triangle. Whether more money 
can _______ more reliability is tricky to answer, more so following the failure of ISRO's PSLV-C61 
mission to launch the EOS-09 earth-observation satellite into a sun-synchronous polar orbit. EOS-
09 was designed to produce high-quality radar images for civilian applications such as land-use 
mapping and hydrology studies and for defence surveillance, even if inclement weather prevailed 
over the areas of interest thanks to a synthetic aperture radar and a C-band data-link. Against the 
backdrop of tensions with Pakistan, such all-weather data would also have informed tactical decisions. 
The Department of Space had also invited several Members of Parliament to the launch event, which 
would have been unusual for a strictly civilian earth-observation satellite. ISRO chairman V. Narayanan 
later said that his team noted a glitch in the vehicle's third stage minutes after liftoff that prevented the 
satellite from reaching its intended altitude. While the cause is yet to be ascertained, the failure is a 
reminder that a "textbook" launch of a rocket even as well-understood as the PSLV is not a given. 
India is just embarking on its ambitious Space-Based Surveillance-3 programme to launch 52 
surveillance satellites; 31 are to be built in the private sector, which still needs ISRO's guidance. Focus 
on the programme also comes against the backdrop of Operation Sindoor, which revealed at least one 
gap in the country's space-based military surveillance capabilities when it depended on a foreign 
commercial operator for more frequent data. Small margins of error in a rocket components' operations 
separate success from failure, and thus cost from reliability. Time, however, is a separate matter: the 
pressing need for surveillance capabilities, if not improving the understanding of climate change and 
disaster risk over India, means that developers lack the luxury of time while also coming under greater 
pressure to deliver across both civilian and military domains. The PSLV-C61 failure follows the failure in 
January to place the NVS-02 navigation satellite into its designated orbit. Between an increasingly 
crowded launch manifest, research and development, data acquisition and processing pipelines, limited 
access to manufacturing capacity, and the human spaceflight programme, it will not be remiss to 
increase the resources available to ISRO if only to ensure its ability to meet India's military needs while 
carrying on with other enterprises, all of which are becoming time-sensitive in a highly competitive global 
industry. 
I