Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 89

A new cycle: On a new-look Indian cricket squad 
India begins its quest for the Test Championship with young players 
ess than a week after South Africa emerged triumphant in the ICC World Test Championship 
(WTC), a new cycle has begun. Bangladesh is already in Sri Lanka, busy playing a Test, while a 
more high-profile series will commence once India takes on England at Headingley in Leeds 
from Friday (June 20, 2025). A new-look Indian squad under the stewardship of Shubman Gill 
will step out for duty while a clean break from the past has been _________ due to the 
retirements of Virat Kohli, Rohit Sharma and R. Ashwin, and the omission of Ajinkya Rahane 
and Cheteshwar Pujara. A tour of the Old Blighty is never easy and that has been the case 
since 1932 when India made its Test debut at Lord's. Series triumphs were etched in 1971, 1986 and 
2007, but otherwise it has been a tale of Indian batters floundering against swing under whimsical 
English skies. Even as India beat Australia in its backyard over the last decade despite the loss in the 
last encounter, England has remained a tough place to tour. However, cricket's spiritual home has also 
gifted some special Indian memories like B.S. Chandrasekhar's spells, the 1983 World Cup victory, Dilip 
Vengsarkar's three consecutive hundreds at Lord's, and the Test debuts of Sourav Ganguly and Rahul 
Dravid, to name a few. 
A sense of a beginning is evident in cricket's birthplace and seen in that light, Gill and his men are in the 
right place. Ravindra Jadeja, K.L. Rahul, Jasprit Bumrah and Karun Nair, busy charting a comeback, 
constitute the seniors in a unit high on youth with even Gill being just 25. The Punjab star has to deliver 
on two counts, both as batter and skipper. A 35.05 average after 32 Tests does not reflect the quality 
innate in him. It is not just that the batting core has changed as even the slip-cordon will have new 
personnel, and the way Gill guides his outfit through this transition will determine how India will fare in 
the latest WTC cycle. Bumrah will remain the spearhead but with workload management being the key, 
The will not play all the five Tests at stake. His old ally Mohammed Shami will be missed but in 
Mohammed Siraj and others, Bumrah has a set of talented fellow pace bowlers. Squaring against them 
would be Ben Stokes and his men busy relishing home advantage with Joe Root being the lead anchor 
among their batters. In a challenging tour stretching all the way to August 4, Gill, in tandem with vice-
captain Rishabh Pant, gets an opportunity to forge a fresh and strong Indian unit. 
L


Qualified cheer: On Shubhanshu Shukla, Axiom-4 mission 
Shubhanshu Shukla's paid flight to ISS will provide insight on human spaceflight 
It noon on June 25, 2025 (IST), India's Shubhanshu Shukla lifted off with three other 
astronauts from NASA's Florida spaceport to the International Space Station (ISS) as part of 
the Axiom-4 commercial mission. This is the first time an Indian has gone to orbital space 
since Rakesh Sharma in 1984. If the Dragon crew capsule docks successfully with the ISS 
on June 26, Mr. Shukla will also become the first Indian onboard the ISS. Over the next two 
weeks, he and the ISS crew will perform a suite of experiments carried by the Axiom-4 
mission, including eight from the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO). Mr. Shukla is 
among the leading candidates to fly in India's maiden human space flight mission, Gaganyaan, currently 
slated for 2027. For now, the Department of Space has not articulated the reasons for spending ₹548 
crore to buy Mr. Shukla's seat on Axiom-4. Against the backdrop of the ₹20,200-crore budget for 
Gaganyaan, Mr. Shukla's paid flight to the ISS, packaged along with advanced training for him and back-
up crewmate Prasanth Nair, will give India considerable insight into human space flight and how it is 
coordinated ahead of mounting its own astronaut expeditions, regardless of the money spent. However, 
this does not spare the Department of Space and ISRO from communicating the rationale and extent of 
these benefits, which has yet to happen. 
Space flight has changed considerably between Mr. Sharma's and Mr. Shukla's flights: the stakes today 
are multidimensional and more demanding. Axiom is a private entity contracted with NASA and SpaceX, 
and which sells seats to commercial missions to the ISS. But uncertainties linger over NASA's future 
access to the Dragon crew capsules following Elon Musk's spat with U.S. President Donald Trump. The 
effects of Mr. Trump's tariffs and his willingness to honour predecessor Joe Biden's commitments to 
India, given the major budget cuts he has proposed for 2026, are also unclear. And the ISS is set to be 
decommissioned by 2030. In this world, the future of India's own space programme is caught between 
multiple futures. NASA and private U.S. companies, including Blue Origin, have said they would like to 
use Gaganyaan technologies in future missions as part of strengthening U.S.-India ties in the space 
sector. But even as the country balances commercial with public sector needs, it needs to remain a 
relevant provider of space flight services. The Indian government has signalled that it is willing to take 
positive steps to bolster the private sector but which, thus far, have been inadequate. Thus, once Mr. 
Shukla returns, ISRO's to-do list will move to the next big challenge even as public expectations of it, 
including transparent communication, will soar. 
A