Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 5

A cut in time: On the plastic pollution problem 
Economic costs of ban on plastic must be seen with its ill-effects on health 
Despite a week of wrangling, an ambitious endeavour piloted by the United Nations Environment 
Programme to phase out plastic turned out to be a failure. The Global Plastics Treaty is the result of a 
resolution by member-countries of the United Nations, passed in 2022, to 'end plastic pollution, including 
in the marine environment.' Over the next two years, countries met five times, including the latest (billed 
as the final one), to create a broad framework agreement. The UN resolution of 2022 was deemed 
historic as it gave the impression that the world was unanimous that plastic pollution could only be 
addressed through globally coordinated action. However, it is the solution to the problem that has proven 
to be divisive. Of the nearly 170 countries gathered at the fifth round of meetings in Busan, roughly half 
- led by the European Union and supported by Pacific island-nations - were of the view that despite 
the usefulness of plastic and its significant role in enabling mass consumption through the modern era, 
its relative indestructibility was now an environmental hazard. It had begun to seep into the bodies of 
animals, both of the land and sea, and had progressed to be much more than an eyesore in the form of 
litter flowing out of overwhelmed municipal recycling systems. 
The claim that better recycling and re-use will redeem the situation, these nations believe, is a pipe 
dream and, therefore, imposing gradual cuts on the source of plastic, virgin polymer, was the only 
effective route to ending plastic pollution. However, many of the large developing countries, and those 
with economies premised on the extraction of oil and petrochemical refining, baulk at such a proposal. 
They view calls to cut plastic production as trade barriers masquerading as environmentalism. They view 
the framing of the plastic pollution problem as one that requires regulating production as something that 
goes beyond the intent of the 2022 resolution. While talks have stalled, it is likely that countries will 
reconvene next year - possibly with a fresh perspective - and get beyond the impasse more 
creatively. India has chosen to side with the countries that are averse to production cuts; yet, it must 
acknowledge that its capacity to recycle plastic is only about a third of the plastic that is annually 
introduced. The indispensability of plastic to the economy cannot be a permanent excuse to delay action 
on evaluating its health impacts on people in India, its ecology and marine environment. A planned exit is 
always better than finding oneself on the wrong side of history.


Silica scars: On India's silicosis problem 
Mine workers need early diagnosis and treatment of silicosis 
India's growth aspirations have spurred the national mining industry to extract more minerals for use 
in construction. One such mineral is silicon dioxide, or silica, an important component of sand and 
stone. Mine workers exposed to silica dust for many years have a heightened risk of developing 
silicosis, wherein microscopic silica particles are lodged in lung tissue, hampering their normal 
function. The risk of silicosis is age-agnostic and determined by exposure, and is chronic after onset. 
Thus, it threatens millions of workers, many of them young. In 1999, the Indian Council of Medical 
Research reported that more than eight million people in the country were highly exposed to silica dust; 
this population could only have increased since the national government has opened new mines and 
expanded old ones. On November 29, the National Green Tribunal (NGT) directed the Central Pollution 
Control Board to draft new guidelines vis-a-vis "granting permission for [silica] mining and washing 
plants", and the Uttar Pradesh government and Pollution Control Board to set up health-care facilities in 
areas with silica mines. The NGT is well-intentioned but mine workers are desperate for action. 
The Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions Code 2020 requires mine workers' employers 
to notify threats of bodily harm to workers and workers developing specific diseases, including silicosis. 
But operators often do not notify the Directorate General of Mines Safety, preventing the state from 
developing an actionable awareness of mine operators' workplace practices; nor have States of their 
own initiative strived to collect this data. The potential for special hospitals to ameliorate this situation is 
also unclear: the Code obligates qualified medical practitioners to notify silicosis cases to the Chief 
Inspector-cum-Facilitator, yet it already required operators to provide free annual health check-ups, 
which have failed to reveal silicosis cases. Health-care providers have even been known to misrecord 
silicosis as tuberculosis. The NGT also noted that "concerned authorities" are not living up to the law. 
The state's passivity is thus the principal roadblock to mine workers' welfare, which guidelines are 
unlikely to surmount. The passivity also flies in the face of climate justice, an idea India has ironically 
wielded in multilateral fora to demand concessions on emissions and adaptation financing. The nation's 
mineral resources are concentrated in 'resource frontier' States that have low literacy and health-care 
coverage, a disorganized labour force, and where mining provides crucial revenue. When the state 
diverts the concessions to suppliers of cheap silica, workers tolerate bad working conditions and delay 
seeking medical or legal recourse until the silicosis has become life-threatening. 
I