Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 108

Figure of speech: On the Prime Minister's Independence Day address 
The Prime Minister held out assurances even while feeding apprehension 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's 12th consecutive Independence Day address from the Red 
Fort was notable not only for highlighting national security and self-reliance but also for 
laying stress on a communally coloured demographic threat to the country. While showering 
praise on the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, Mr. Modi repeated its refrain by saying that 
the seeds of a new crisis were being sown. The launch of a High-Powered Demography 
Mission, to address what he described as "a deliberate conspiracy" to alter the demography 
of the country, is little more than a thinly disguised effort to polarize the country on religious 
lines by pointing to the different rates of growth in population among different communities and to the 
"infiltration" of undocumented migrants from the neighbouring countries. However, the speech also 
dwelt on substantive issues with a considerable focus on self-reliance in all fields including the economy, 
defence and technology, and youth empowerment. Mr. Modi also presented an account of the 
developments in India's national security and developmental landscape in the last year, and previewed 
what to anticipate ahead. 
Mr. Modi lauded the armed forces for Operation Sindoor, which, he said, showcased the effectiveness of 
India's defence capabilities and indigenous weaponry. He also used the occasion to warn India's 
adversaries, particularly Pakistan, underscoring the policy of zero tolerance toward terrorism and cross-
border attacks. Recent successes in the combat against the Maoist insurgency also found a mention. 
As in a plan announced by Mr. Modi, Mission Sudarshan Chakra, a fully indigenous defence system, 
will be developed and deployed by 2035. The details were scarce, but he described it as "a powerful 
weapon system" which "will not only neutralize the enemy's attack but will also hit back at the enemy 
many times more". Speaking amid rapid changes in global power equations, Mr. Modi's Independence 
Day message was also aimed at the United States, which has announced tariffs as high as 50% on 
many Indian products. While promising to focus on revving up the domestic economy, Mr. Modi showed 
an awareness of the challenges that the Indian economy is facing. The next generation GST reforms 
would be rolled out by Deepavali 2025, which would reduce the tax burden on core goods and services 
and boost business. On the one hand, Mr. Modi is trying to cultivate his ideological ecosystem while on 
the other, he is trying to tackle the material challenges facing the nation. The success of one, however, 
can only come at the cost of the other. 
P


Familiar impasse: On the global response to eliminating plastic pollution 
Talks on limiting use of plastic must be built on mutual trust 
lobal resistance to a universal treaty on eliminating plastic pollution remains stubborn and 
huge. Last week, the sixth attempt since 2022 by the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) to get member-nations to agree upon a treaty to address plastic 
pollution ran into the familiar vortex of opposition. There was disagreement among the 
major blocs of countries on whether comprehensively addressing plastic pollution requires 
eliminating plastic production itself. All countries agree that the ubiquitous polythene bag, despite its 
immense practicability and affordability as a container, has ballooned into a civic crisis. India generates 
around 3.4 million tonnes (MT) of plastic waste but recycles only about 30%. Its plastic consumption rose 
at a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of 9.7% from 14 MT in 2016-17 to over 20 MT in 2019-20. 
India has a production ban on about 20 single-use plastic items - cups, straws, spoons. While this has, 
to some extent, induced a degree of behavioural change - in greater reliance of paper and cloth bags 
- it has had little impact on waste management and recycling. This is also reflective of the global 
picture. According to the UNEP, the world produces more than 430 MT of plastic annually, two-thirds of 
which are short-lived products that soon become waste. Overall, 46% of plastic waste is landfilled, while 
22% is mismanaged and becomes litter. In 2019, plastic, which is a derivate of fossilized crude, 
generated 1.8 billion metric tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions or about 3.4% of the global total.  
Plastic, therefore, can be seen as a waste management problem that can be solved by improving 
incentives for the market to do a better job of collecting waste and recycling. However, there are 
countries that point to the decades of attempts made on these lines, with limited gains. To add to that, 
more evidence has piled up that plastic, non-biodegradable as it is, is making its way into human, animal 
and marine food systems. Island-nations and territories are swamped by plastic waste washing up on 
their shores. Then there are granular forms of plastic - or microplastics - with potential for harm. Thus, 
the only real solution is to reduce at source. However, nations are not all agreed upon this aspect of 
toxicity. Therefore, in treaty-linked talks, they view calls to cut production as tactics to impose trade 
barriers and add to the general climate of tariff uncertainty. Unless countries can build greater trust 
before such talks and hear each other out with an open mind, having more meetings will only be futile. 
The halcyon days, when some countries could steer resolutions on the environment assuming that the 
'common good' was incontrovertible, are long past. 
G