Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 111

Imagined righteousness: On conduct on social media 
Courts must protect rights of citizens, not allow the state untrammelled power 
In urging the Union government to work on guidelines to regulate speech on social media, the 
Supreme Court of India is seeking to empower an executive that is already weaponizing the legal 
limits on freedom of expression. In response to a petition by a non-profit assailing derogatory 
remarks by online figures against disabled persons, the Court issued instructions that further a 
problematic trend of the judiciary egging on the state to encroach on legal grey areas with 
statutory restrictions that undermine constitutionally guaranteed rights. To regard distasteful 
humour, however disturbing it might be, as a problem to be solved through the courts and by 
executive rulemaking, is to fall into a deceptive trap of imagined righteousness that progressive 
democracies should avoid. There are always unpleasant consequences in expanding powers to police 
speech: partisans wield their powers to ferociously monitor what is or is not appropriate, 
instrumentalizing agencies of the state to suppress art and political speech they do not like; citizens find 
themselves constantly looking over their shoulder before expressing themselves. Under the overbearing 
atmosphere of censored expression, truths and ideas that must be reckoned with for a functioning 
democracy are stifled. People should not have to constantly look against asterisks that set terms and 
conditions for fundamental liberties. Film producers and directors have been pushed away from exploring 
subject matters that would help India progress socially, and journalists have been dealing with first 
information reports for carrying out their professional duties. 
In recent years, the Union government has, formally and informally, expanded its control of online 
speech, with the problematic Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021, and an amendment to those Rules that would allow social media companies to be 
proceeded against for content posted by users that has been flagged by the government. Monday's 
(August 25, 2025) instructions seem set to expand those ambitions, which are themselves under 
challenge with the Supreme Court. Hate speech and speech inciting violence against minorities are 
criminalized in India, giving disadvantaged groups powerful avenues of recourse when they are 
legitimately wronged. Handing an executive, which already has a record of mala fide weaponisation of 
media and speech regulations, more powers would be dangerous in the extreme. At a fundamental level, 
such judicial pronouncements, which cite "misuse of freedom of speech" as a ground, seem to 
misperceive the framework of their institutional role: that of a protector of rights under a clear 
constitutional framework, and not of an unchallenged lord in a feudal society.


Moving past tariff 
The US administration has pressed ahead with its decision to impose a 25 per cent penalty on 
Indian imports effective from August 27. This takes total tariffs to 50 per cent, effectively 
pricing out Indian goods in the US market. The sheer double standard in imposing this 
penalty needs to be called out. Such action has not been taken against other countries that 
import from Russia. For instance, according to the Centre for Research on Energy and Clean 
Air, in June, China accounted for 47 per cent of Russia's crude exports, with the EU and 
Turkey importing 6 per cent each. In the case of Russia's LNG exports, the EU was the largest 
buyer at 51 per cent, followed by China (21 per cent) and Japan (18 per cent). Tariffs, however, do not 
seem to be the only issue. There has also been talk about the H-1B visa. For instance, Howard Lutnick, 
the US Secretary of Commerce, has called the visa system "a scam", and spoken about changing it. By 
all accounts, relations with the US could remain mired in uncertainty. 
The 50 per cent tariff rate now makes trade with the US infeasible in most segments. Several sectors 
ranging from shrimps to diamonds, gold and jewellery, textiles, leather and footwear are expected to be 
badly hit, though some like pharmaceuticals, electronics and petroleum products have been exempted. 
The Global Trade Research Initiative, a think tank, estimates that two-thirds of exports to the US will be 
hit by the 50 per cent tariff. There will be economic pain and companies will face disruptions. For 
instance, textiles and apparel manufacturers in Tirupur, Noida and Surat have reportedly stopped 
production. Labour will be impacted and diversifying away from the US and finding new markets will not 
be easy. There may also be indirect impacts. For instance, companies, both domestic and foreign, may 
be less inclined to launch fresh investments in the country amid uncertainty. The Indian government has 
stood firm in the face of mounting pressure. It should continue to stick to its red lines in trade 
agreements, even as it must continue its talks with the US. On Monday, the two countries spoke about 
energy security and defence cooperation under the India-US 2+2 Intersessional Dialogue. But who India 
trades with - Russian oil deliveries for the coming months would give a better picture of shifts, if any, in 
sourcing of crude - should be determined by the country's own cost-benefit analysis, not by US President 
Donald Trump's pressure. And while the government must continue to pursue trade deals with other 
countries, it must also aggressively push forward the domestic reform agenda. As per a report in this 
paper, two new informal groups of ministers (GoMs) have been set up to "prescribe reforms in the 
economic and social sectors". The government must move ahead on this with urgency.