Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 19

Gates in the sky: On ISRO and SpaDeX 
Docking technology allows ISRO to think of longer space flights 
In December 30, 2024, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) launched its 
PSLV-C60 mission. Its primary payload was a pair of satellites for the Space Docking 
Experiment, or SpaDeX, to demonstrate orbital rendezvous and docking. The ability to 
execute it in orbit is an essential stepping stone to more complex missions. The launch 
was also hailed as ISRO ending the year on a high, but SpaDeX reminded us that 
sophisticated spaceflight missions care little for arbitrary deadlines. The satellites 
successfully docked on January 16 after a few abortive attempts. They were expected to 
dock on January 7, which ISRO postponed to January 9, then brought them close without docking on 
January 12 in an apparent data-taking effort. It nixed the January 9 attempt after the satellites were 
found to have drifted more than expected, prompting measures to arrest the displacement and 
reinitialize the experiment. Once docked, ISRO began tests to verify if the satellites could exchange 
electric power, then undock and separate, followed by testing their own payloads that would be spread 
over two years. The C60 mission also launched the fourth stage of the rocket as an orbital platform. It 
carried 24 payloads from various ISRO centres and private enterprises testing various technologies. The 
Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre's Compact Research module for Orbital Plant Studies was able to have 
cowpea seeds germinate in orbit, capturing the popular imagination. 
Docking allows spacefaring components to be launched separately and assembled in space to form a 
larger module. This allows a space agency to plan interplanetary missions whose spacecraft are 
heavier than what the heaviest rockets can launch. Docking is thus a symbolic gateway to new 
opportunities, with the Chandrayaan-4 lunar sample return mission being a good example. In 
anticipation, ISRO loaded the SpaDeX satellites with enough fuel for multiple tries and also 
continuously collected data. Its own nervousness became evident, too: after the first two attempts, it 
backed down from its promise to live-stream the successful one. Docking technology has become 
desirable thanks to the perceived inevitability of long-duration spaceflight. The pressure to lower costs 
imposed by, say, crewed missions to Mars or space-mining operations has rendered ideas such as in 
space satellite servicing and orbital resupply platforms, both of which require docking, more lucrative. 
ISRO plans to start launching the 'Bharatiya Antariksh Station' (BAS) later this decade. As it embarks on 
a new phase of operations, with V. Narayanan as its new chairman, ISRO should also describe a 
coherent vision for the ex-ante utility expected of BAS. Without this context, the larger pieces of the 
Indian space Programme and their purpose relative to other countries' plans seem adrift.


Nothing alarming: on China's HMPV cases 
Reports of many HMPV cases in China is reflection of heightened surveillance 
ive years after the SARS-CoV-2 virus overwhelmed hospitals in Wuhan, China, acute 
respiratory diseases caused by viruses including the human metapneumovirus (HMPV) in 
children and the elderly, and influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), are increasing in 
the country, especially in its northern provinces. However, the sharp rise in acute respiratory 
diseases is not unusual during this time of the year, and as per a Chinese official, the overall number of 
cases in 2024 would be "smaller" than in 2023. Surprisingly, while the World Health Organization and the 
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have not raised a red flag so far and there is almost nil 
reporting in the international media, the Indian media is awash with reports of an HMPV "outbreak" in 
China. A recent meeting of the Joint Monitoring Group under the aegis of the Union Health Ministry noted 
that the situation in China is "not unusual in view of the ongoing flu season", and the "usual pathogens 
that are expected during the season" are causing the present surge in respiratory diseases. The HMPV 
virus was first identified in children in 2001 in the Netherlands. Infection with HMPV usually occurs by the 
age of five years with reinfection occurring throughout life as immune protection induced by the virus is 
too weak to prevent repeated infections. The virus causes upper and/or lower respiratory tract infections, 
with lower respiratory tract infections being among the most common. While the virus often causes only 
mild disease, it can lead to severe illness requiring hospitalization in children, immunocompromised 
populations and the elderly. 
Globally, 3%-10% of hospital admissions and 1% of acute lower respiratory infection-related deaths in 
children under age five in 2018 are attributed to HMPV, as per a 2021 paper. The study also found that 
children younger than six months, especially those in low- and lower-middle-income countries, are at 
greater risk of death caused by the HMPV virus. Detection of a large number of HMPV cases among 
children aged less than 14 years in China is a reflection of the heightened surveillance and testing for the 
virus. On the contrary, India does not have any approved inexpensive tests that are widely available for 
diagnosing the virus. When testing for HMPV in patients with acute respiratory disease should be 
routine, as the virus has been in circulation for years globally, including India, and fatality is 1% in young 
children, India is only now expanding the number of laboratories testing for HMPV beyond the Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) network due to the spike in HMPV cases in China. What is also 
urgently needed is a regulatory framework that facilitates a rapid approval of diagnostic tests in the 
context of local and global outbreaks of novel and less known pathogens. 
F