Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 61

Lessons not learnt: On Trump and the Department of Education 
Trump's move to shut Department of Education is irresponsible 
 new broom sweeps clean, but reckless change serves little purpose. After targeting health 
care - pulling the United States out of the World Health Organization and paralysing USAID 
- U.S. President Donald Trump has turned to another cornerstone of the state: education, 
whose long-term significance to any nation is indisputable. Last week, he signed an 
executive order to "begin eliminating" the federal Department of Education (DoE), vowing to 
shut it down "as quickly as possible". Established in 1979, the DoE administers federal 
student loans for college and university students, and provides targeted support for disadvantaged 
groups, including students from low-income families and those with disabilities. As in India, public K-12 
schools in the U.S. are primarily managed at the State level, with only a fraction of their funding coming 
from the federal government. Yet the DoE plays a critical role in ensuring a baseline of equity. White 
House Press Secretary Karoline Leavitt defended the executive order by citing decades of "failing test 
scores" and low student performance, despite over $3 trillion in federal spending. "What has been the 
return on that investment for the American taxpayer?" she asked. But demanding a measurable return 
on investment on public welfare is not just misguided - it borders on malevolence. It targets the most 
vulnerable students and risks stripping away their only path out of adversity. 
The Department of Education has long been in the cross hairs of Conservatives; since the Reagan era, 
abolishing it has been a Republican aspiration. But no one has come closer to realising that goal than 
Mr. Trump. Even before signing this order, the department's workforce had been nearly halved, with 
abrupt terminations issued under the Elon Musk-led Department of Government Efficiency - now a 
hallmark of the new administration's approach. Critics have denounced the move, arguing that if student 
outcomes are truly the concern, efforts should first focus on reforming and strengthening the system, and 
not dismantling it. Crucially, the executive order cannot take full effect without Congressional approval 
- and it remains to be seen whether Mr. Trump's political will can carry it through. Already, lawsuits are 
being filed in federal courts, challenging the order's legality. The future of millions of disadvantaged 
students hangs in the balance. It is up to the rest of the U.S. to ensure that a lifeline is not pulled out.


The need for universal and equitable health coverage 
Integration of TB services within the broader public health system is key to India's 
pursuit of equitable, universal health coverage for all 
India has made substantial and tangible progress in Tuberculosis (TB) care, adopting new 
strategies to detect, treat and prevent TB. Some key areas of progress include the expansion of 
molecular testing for rapid detection of TB and drug-resistance; the introduction of the shorter, all-
oral BPaLM regimen (a combination of four drugs Bedaquiline (B), Pretomanid (Pa), Linezolid (L), 
and Moxifloxacin (M)); doubling of the entitlement under the Ni-kshay Poshan Yojana (NPY) for 
nutrition support to ₹1,000 a month; roll-out of TB preventive therapy; and an expanded role for 
communities through the involvement of TB survivors and Champions. The impact of the roll-out of 
these strategies can be seen in the 17.7% decline in TB incidence in India, from 237 per 1,00,000 
population in 2015 to 195 per 1,00,000 population in 2023, in tandem with a 21.4% reduction in TB-
related deaths. Since Independence, India's public health system has delivered disease control services 
through primarily vertical health programmes, such as the National Tuberculosis Elimination Programme 
(NTEP). While this vertical nature has allowed for concentrated focus and brought benefits in many 
ways, it has also been limiting. Integration of TB services within the broader public health system is 
key to India's pursuit of equitable, universal health coverage (UHC) for all. The ambitious Ayushman 
Bharat National Health Protection Scheme was launched in India in 2018 to provide UHC for the Indian 
population. Today, TB has been integrated within both key components of Ayushman Bharat: the 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY), considered the world's largest insurance scheme, and 
the Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (AAMs, formerly known as Health and Wellness Centres), which provide 
a comprehensive basket of primary health-care services in rural and urban India. From the perspective 
of a person with TB symptoms, the best experience would be accessing consistently high-quality 
services at the first point of contact. The integration of TB services at the AAM primary care level is 
designed to meet this need, bringing together diagnostic, treatment and preventive care under one 
umbrella. AAMs serve as sputum collection centres, where people with TB symptoms can give samples 
for testing. The NTEP has also been optimizing sample collection and transportation methods through a 
diagnostics network optimisation exercise. A person diagnosed with TB at a secondary or tertiary care 
facility can undergo treatment at the health centre closest to their residence, again minimizing time and 
costs. In the first two months when people with TB are weak and drop outs as well as mortality is 
highest, community health officers positioned at the AAMs and their teams must be trained to identify 
and refer such patients for admission. While TB services have been free within the public health system, 
over 50% of all people with TB symptoms continue to seek care in the private sector. Uneven standards 
of care across the vastly heterogeneous private health sector has led to delays in diagnosis and 
contributed to poor outcomes as well as significant out-of-pocket expenditure (OOPE) for families. It is 
imperative to strengthen referrals from the private to the public health system, particularly for those who 
cannot afford to incur substantial expenditure on health and who may not be aware that TB services are 
freely available in the public health system. It is equally essential to ensure that the AB-PMJAY provides 
full insurance coverage for those who seek care for TB in the private or public sector, particularly those 
who are severely ill.