Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 11

Crime and shame: On the France mass rape case 
The stigma and impunity attached to sexual assault must end 
The horrors will never go away, and a survivor has got only a semblance of closure after a 
French court sentenced her former husband to 20 years in prison for committing and 
orchestrating mass rapes of her for almost a decade. The 72-year-old man admitted in court 
that he had drugged the survivor ,72, for years, before raping her, and recruiting strangers 
online to violate her as she was deeply asleep. In all, 51 people, aged between the late 20s and 70s, 
assaulted her as she lay in a drug-induced stupor, and have got away with punishment ranging from 
three to 15 years, less than the terms sought by prosecutors. The evidence, photographs and films, was 
stored in the man's computer and shown in court to shocking disbelief; the crime itself unravelled in 2020 
after he was being probed for another misdemeanour, filming women inappropriately. But in all this, the 
survivor's brave stand - to waive anonymity and requesting a public trial - and boldly stating that "it is 
not us who should feel shame, but them", struck a chord. People all across France, and the world, have 
followed the over three-month trial, marched on the streets and held demonstrations to seek changes in 
law for sexual crimes against women, and also the overturning of societal perceptions and toxic 
patriarchal behaviour. 
She said she had led the fight for her daughters and grandchildren and also "unrecognized victims 
whose stories often remain in the shadows". She hoped that by opening the doors of the trial, and 
despite her ordeal, "society could take hold of the debates that took place there". Her case has sparked 
fierce debates on abuse and the aftermath. Under French law, the maximum penalty for rape is 20 years, 
and rights activists have pointed out that the punishment is simply not enough for ruining a life. In a 
majority of cases, complaints of sexual abuse and rapes are not reported and prosecuted. France is not 
the only violator. The United Nations says violence against women remains one of the most prevalent 
human rights violations, and that globally, an estimated 736 million women have experienced physical 
and/or sexual violence. The survivor held out hope and confidence that society will "collectively seize a 
future in which each woman and man can live in harmony with respect and mutual understanding". But 
first, her words should be heeded, and rape charges must never be trivialized. She has helped break the 
silence and the shame around rape; the onus is on society and law-makers to shatter the stigma and 
impunity attached to sexual abuse. 
T


Cryptic Silence 
Govt should issue clear guidance for small investors dabbling in cryptocurrencies 
arren Buffett and Bill Gates don't get crypto, but it seems 2cr Indians do. Data shows it's 
been a good year for these currencies in India despite the 30% tax on earnings. Not just 
metros, obscure places like Barbaka in Assam and Botad in Gujarat have surfed the 
waves. Assuming only one person per family is brave enough to play with such highly 
volatile "assets" - flagship Bitcoin touched $47,000 in Jan, $71,000 in June, $54,000 in Sep and is over 
$1L now-it's likely everybody knows somebody with a crypto stake. But that may not be a reason to 
cheer. 
A report by crypto app Coin Switch says a large chunk of investments this year did not go to top-tier 
cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum. Instead, they were pumped into meme and gaming coins 
and layer-2 tokens. Meme coins are based on internet memes and jokes and not considered investment 
worthy. Dogecoin, darling of Elon Musk, is exhibit A. In its first seven years, its value didn't cross 1 cent. 
With Musk's endorsement it shot up to about 70 cents in May 2021 and is at 40 cents now. But it 
languished below 20 cents for three intervening years. What changed? Trump won, and he's pro-crypto 
this time, and Musk's been acting like his right hand. Where would Dogecoin be without Musk? 
Likewise, a meme coin called Elongate owed its very brief and meteoricrise-6,000%-in summer 2021 to 
YouTuber Logan Paul's endorsement. Kim Kardashian did it for another meme coin called EMax on 
Instagram and was fined $1.3mn (11cr). 
Word travels fast on social media. If desperate young investors hear this or that meme coin is their key to 
riches, they will borrow to buy it. RBI has repeatedly called for banning crypto but markets regulator Sebi 
wants to regulate like US, not ban it. GOI must make up its mind and issue clear guidance to small 
investors who could lose real money.