Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 52

A step up: On India and the 2025 Human Development Report 
As India climbs up HDI rankings, rising inequality poses challenges 
mid a disturbing rate of deceleration in global development and a growing divide between 
the rich and the poor, India has inched up on the Human Development Index. In the 2025 
Human Development Report, 'A Matter of Choice: People and Possibilities in the Age of AI', 
released on Tuesday, India ranks 130 out of 193 countries, from 133 in 2022. It registered 
an HDI value increase to 0.685 in 2023 from 0.676 in 2022. Coming on the back of two 
debilitating pandemic years, it can be said that India's recovery has been strong in the three fields HDI 
measures: "a long and healthy life, access to knowledge and a decent standard of living". India's life 
expectancy, at 72 years in 2023, is the highest level it has reached since the inception of the index in 
1990 (58.6 years). Children, the report noted, are expected to stay in school for 13 years on average, up 
from 8.2 years in 1990; and Gross National Income per capita has risen from $2,167.22 in 1990 to 
$9046.76 in 2023. It gave a shout out to programmes such as MGNREGA, the Right to Education Act, 
the National Rural Health Mission and other initiatives for the improved status, but also sounded a word 
of caution about rising inequality, particularly significant income and gender disparities. 
The female labour participation rate may have risen to 41.7% in 2023-24, as the Economic Survey of 
2024-25 pointed out, but a stronger ecosystem needs to be built to ensure women join the workforce and 
are able to retain their jobs. There is a lag in political representation of women as well with no indication 
yet when the constitutional amendments reserving one-third of legislative seats for women will come into 
force. Underprivileged girls and boys still struggle to get an education, and until this anomaly is 
corrected, India's HDI value will not rise. Though the report highlights that 13.5 crore (of India's 
population of 144 crore) "escaped multidimensional poverty" between 2015-16 and 2019-21, income and 
gender inequalities have pulled down India's HDI by 30.7%, "one of the highest losses in the region." The 
thrust of the HDR this year was on AI and how human beings may benefit from it on development 
parameters. India, it said, has been able to retain 20% of AI researchers, up from nearly zero in 2019. 
Going forward, India must leverage AI to deliver on many fronts from agriculture to health care, 
education to public service delivery. But it is imperative that proper policy and safeguards are in place to 
thwart the risk that AI may deepen existing inequalities. 
A


Cast of characters: On the caste census 
Caste census presents both challenges and opportunities 
or the first time since 1931, Census forms will record the caste of Indians, but questions 
remain on the extent of the impact that the data would have on India's affirmative action 
programmes. Decadal censuses, until now, have categorised citizens as SCs, STs and as per 
religion. In decades of reservation for SCs, STs, and OBCs, there have been concerns about 
which communities or individuals within these groups are able to access the benefits. The 
demands for a creamy layer to eliminate the economically better-off sections from reservation 
quotas, and for sub-categorisation to ensure smaller or relatively more backward 
communities are not crowded out, have gained moral and political legitimacy. The Supreme Court of 
India, last August, cleared the way for sub-categorisation within SCs and STs and the Justice G. Rohini 
Commission in 2023 finished a study to examine sub-categorisation within OBCs. The Court's judgment 
was quick to draw a sharp fault line within SC and ST communities on the issue of sub-categorisation 
and the potential for upset in the Commission's report has forced the government to keep its findings 
closely guarded. Caste groupings continue to be a determinant of political and social life and empirical 
data on these are essential for more effective development planning. However, the search for increased 
representativeness through slicing and relabelling of social groups could be an infinite process, 
leaving some group or the other always dissatisfied. 
The other challenge is the logistics of how caste enumeration should be conducted in a country where 
community-based claims are numerous. The understanding of what caste is, the difference between a 
sub-caste and a caste group, and the reconciliation of the understanding of caste names with their 
morphing according to linguistic and regional variations are issues. This gap in understanding caste was 
reflected in the SECC 2011 dataset as well, which yielded more than 46 lakh different "castes". Apart 
from the fact that there is no repository of all castes except for the lists of SCs, STs, and OBCs, the 
question of how to classify communities as castes, tribes, or socially and educationally backward classes 
continues to be litigated in High Courts and the Court in the form of countless petitions for inclusion or 
exclusion. The decision to enumerate caste can also be an opportunity to arrive at a consensus on 
these questions. The political diatribe that accompanied caste enumeration exercises in Bihar, 
Karnataka, and Telangana shows that this could be volatile. The Centre should build consensus on 
the details, now that all parties are in agreement with caste enumeration in principle. That will keep the 
integrity of its finding intact and beyond reproach.