Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 25

Inaugural drama: On the 47th President of the U.S. 
Donald Trump is living up to his threats and promises 
epublican Donald Trump has been sworn in as the 47th President of the U.S. after his 
decisive victory in the November 2024 election. He marked the start of his second innings with 
a slew of executive orders, actions and directives that set the tenor for his administration's 
policy agenda over the four years. Significant among these are the nearly 1,600 pardons 
issued to those prosecuted for their role in the riot at the U.S. Capitol in 2021, the U.S.'s exit from the 
Paris Climate Agreement and the World Health Organization, the ending of birthright citizenship, 
protected under the U.S. Constitution's 14th Amendment, for children of undocumented migrants and 
those on temporary visas, a proposed 100% tariff on BRICS nations - both of which could impact 
Indians considerably - and 25% tariff on Canada and Mexico from February 1, a declaration of national 
emergency on the U.S.'s southern border with Mexico, and reversing 78 executive orders and 
memoranda of his predecessor, Joe Biden. Striking optics of Mr. Trump's swearing-in was the 
positioning of tech bosses Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, Sundar Pichai, and Mark Zuckerberg, prompting 
speculation on whether the incoming administration would have shades of a de facto "oligarchy"; and Mr. 
Musk, who is heading the new government's efforts to reduce waste and inefficiencies, giving a crowd 
what appeared to resemble a Nazi salute. As it stands, however, some, if not most, of these executive 
orders will face legal challenges - the attempted reading down of the 14th Amendment has already 
been challenged in court. 
The note that the second Trump administration has struck in terms of its policy agenda appears to be 
innately hostile to the progressive agenda of the Democrats. To a considerable extent, that is to be 
expected, as the two parties diverge significantly on matters such as the economy, immigration and 
reproductive rights. Yet, previous Republican governments have often sought to build bridges with 
Democratic colleagues in Congress and at the State level, to find bipartisan consensus in key policy 
areas rather than risk deadlock and internecine conflicts over policy design and resource allocation. In 
this instance, however, the federal government trifecta and a sympathetic Supreme Court stacked with 
conservatives might mean that the Trump team needs to rely even less on support from across the aisle 
than it did during the Trump first term. Further, Mr. Trump appears to be emboldened by the breadth of 
R 

            his election victory to allow unconventional, even bizarre, policy priorities to enter the proposed agenda, 
including ideas such as the takeover of the Panama Canal, the de-recognition of transgender rights, 
threatening Denmark with a plan to takeover Greenland, and the prospect of travel bans for certain 
countries. Perhaps 
America is getting what it voted for.


Further south: On the Iron Age and the south 
Archaeologists must look for more iron-specific sites in the south 
The Iron Age in India has been a subject of fascination and discussion. In the rest of the world, 
the Iron Age succeeded the Copper-Bronze Age or bridged the gap between the Bronze 
Age and the Early Historic period. But the situation in India is different: when the region north 
of the Vindhyas belonged to the pre-iron Chalcolithic or Copper Age, the south, with over 
3,000 sites, was associated with iron. Many archaeologists have, generally and 
conservatively, placed the Iron Age to be in the second millennium BCE. Given this 
backdrop, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M.K. Stalin's recent statement, that the origin of iron in the State 
could be traced to the first quarter of the fourth millennium BCE, is significant as this pushes the 
antiquity of iron further. After excavations in the mid-Ganga Valley of Uttar Pradesh about 25 years 
ago, early evidence of iron technology was dated to 1800 BCE. But now, the work in Sivagalai in Tamil 
Nadu, which was carried out between 2019 and 2022, has made authorities attribute the introduction of 
iron in the country to the early part of the fourth millennium BCE, even though the period of 2500 BCE-
3000 BCE is taken as a mid-range value. This forms the highlight of a study by the State Department of 
Archaeology (TNSDA), titled "Antiquity of Iron: Recent radiometric dates from Tamil Nadu". The TNSDA 
had the scientific dating results of its study validated by renowned institutions such as the Beta Analytic 
laboratory in the U.S. Mr. Stalin's observation was made keeping the findings in mind. Early this month, 
The announced a $1-million prize scheme for deciphering the script of the Indus Valley Civilization. 
The work by the TNSDA should spur new thinking with regard to the strategies to be adopted by 
archaeologists who are working on the Iron Age of India. They may have to look for more iron-specific 
sites than copper-cum-iron sites, which will save time, energy and resources. Even though the Tamil 
Nadu government supports research projects on a wide range of themes in other States, the TNSDA has 
its constraints with regard to territorial jurisdiction. This underscores the need for complementing 
Tamil Nadu's efforts with those of other southern States. The Archaeological Survey of India should take 
the initiative of bringing the entire southern region under a common fold and enabling well-designed and 
coordinated work. After all, the idea is to share available resources and expertise in the country to arrive 
at more reliable findings. At a time when certain forces are increasingly using history and culture as 
powerful instruments to pursue their political agenda, credible and concrete evidence on the antiquity of 
the country will naturally put to rest any claim based on baseless assumptions.