Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 85

Escalation spiral: on the Israel-Iran conflict 
Global powers must persuade Israel to end its reckless war 
srael's unprovoked aggression against Iran has not only plunged West Asia into its gravest regional 
crisis since the 1973 Arab-Israeli war but also pushed the Jewish nation into an unprecedented 
security calamity. If Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu expected the June 13 attack on Iran, 
hitting its nuclear facilities and assassinating its top generals and nuclear scientists, to cripple 
Tehran - like how Israel destroyed the Egyptian air force on June 5, 1967 during the Six-Day War 
- he appears to have made a mistake. Iran, in a swift and forceful response, rained ballistic 
missiles on Israeli cities. Until Monday morning, it had fired over 370 missiles, hitting an oil refinery 
in Haifa, a top research institute in Rehovot near Tel Aviv and even residential areas. At least 24 Israelis 
have been killed and over 500 wounded. While Israel has established air supremacy in Iran, it has not 
managed to destroy Iran's nuclear programme, which is dispersed and buried across the country. Israel 
keeps targeting Iran's military and intelligence leadership, with the aim of weakening the government. On 
Sunday, Mr. Netanyahu said regime change in Iran could be one of the outcomes of Israel's attack. But 
every time Israel hits Iran, Tehran fires dozens of ballistic missiles back. While Israel is trying to take 
escalation dominance, Iran is trying to establish deterrence through offence. The result is an escalation 
spiral. 
Mr. Netanyahu should have carefully considered the consequences and avoided launching this reckless, 
illegal war. The Israeli attack came just days before the United States and Iran were to hold the sixth 
round of nuclear talks. The war has practically killed the possibility of a diplomatic solution to the nuclear 
crisis. This also raises questions about Israel's endgame. If Israel is not able to completely dismantle 
Iran's nuclear programme, it may, as Mr. Netanyahu has suggested, push for a state collapse or regime 
change in Tehran. Nobody knows what comes next. U.S. President Donald Trump has said that he is still 
open to a deal with Iran. But Mr. Trump wants Tehran to completely abandon its nuclear enrichment 
programme, which Iranian leaders are not ready to do - not yet. This deadlock only makes the conflict 
more dangerous. If the war drags on, the risk of U.S. involvement increases. And If Iran retaliates by 
bombing American bases in the Persian Gulf, shutting down the Strait of Hormuz or targeting tankers in 
the Gulf of Oman, it could trigger a security and economic catastrophe. This is another reason why a 
ceasefire between Iran and Israel is urgently needed. Global powers, particularly the U.S., Israel's chief 
patron, and Russia, an Iranian ally, must play a more proactive role in mediation and peacemaking. If Mr. 
Trump is really a man of peace, as he claims to be, this is his moment to take the lead in restoring order 
in West Asia. 
I


Mind the gap: on India and the Global Gender Gap Index report 
India needs to ensure women's participation in policymaking 
India has dropped two points from its position last year in the World Economic Forum's Global 
Gender Gap Index report, holding at 131 out of 148 countries. The parity score is just 64.1%, 
making it among one of the lowest-ranked countries in South Asia, according to the report released 
last week. The Index measures gender parity in a country across four aspects - economic 
participation and opportunity; educational attainment; health and survival, and political 
empowerment. While the performance of India in three of the four dimensions is either stable or has 
marginally improved, the significant lack of achievement in the fourth weighs down the overall result. The 
report says, in the economic participation and opportunity category, India has improved by +0.9 
percentage points. The parity in estimated earned income rises from 28.6% to 29.9%, positively 
impacting the subindex score, the report said. Scores in labour force participation rate remained the 
same (45.9%) as last year - India's highest achieved to date. In the educational attainment and health 
and survival categories, the scores have been driven up by positive shifts. It is in the political 
empowerment category that India records a drop in parity, since the last evaluation. Female 
representation in Parliament fell from 14.7% to 13.8% in 2025, lowering the indicator score for the 
second year in a row below 2023 levels. Also evaluated was the share of women in ministerial roles, 
which fell from 6.5% to 5.6 %, continuing the sinking trend since 2023. 
The path ahead is obvious - consolidate and improve on the gains and make efforts to set right the 
lacunae with policies and political will. India has had a long, shameful tussle on this issue as it toyed with 
the idea of increasing representation for women in polity. The controversial Women's Reservation Bill 
was passed in 2023, 27 years after it was first introduced in 1996. The Bill has been visited upon by 
many charades, was blocked at every turn, and the path to actualization of the goal was lined with 
monumental impediments. The present Act reserves one third of the seats for women in Parliament and 
the State legislatures, but will only be implemented from 2029, after the completion of the Census, and 
the delimitation exercise. But India climbing up the ranks of a global index should be only secondary to 
achieving a rounded, applause-worthy, gender parity structure within the country. There is, also, nothing 
keeping political parties from increasing women's participation in the electoral process, even before the 
law necessitates it. 
I