Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 101

Editorial                                                   August 5, 2025 
Fascinating finale: On India's cricketing tour of England 
Neither India nor England deserved to lose this hard-
fought series 
India's long cricketing tour of England concluded in a 
gripping stalemate. A 2-2 verdict, following Shubman 
Gill's men snatching a six-run triumph against the host 
at the Oval on Monday (August 4, 2025), was an apt 
reflection of a well-contested Test series that featured five 
matches. Australia has been conquered a few times in its 
backyard, but for India, England at home remains a tough 
opponent. Only thrice has India seized a Test series under 
the whimsical English skies, with the last series victory 
coming in 2007. The odds were stacked high too as this 
was a visiting unit that had lost Rohit Sharma, Virat Kohli 
and R. Ashwin to retirements. Gill's men, however, fought 
hard. In an age in which there are whispers about 
implementing four-day Tests, this series was a reflection of 
all that is good with cricket's traditional format as every 
contest spilled onto the fifth day. England's Bazball style 
did upset India's best laid plans at times and yet the 
bowlers found ways to strike back. England was led well by 
I 

Editorial                                                   August 5, 2025 
the rousing manner of all-rounder Ben Stokes till he 
skipped the last Test due to injury. And in Joe Root, 
England has a batter for the ages, and if he stays fit, Sachin 
Tendulkar's record Test aggregate of 15,921 runs may not 
remain immune. 
In the distant past, a tour of England featured additional 
warm-up games against the Counties. The length of the 
tour helped players rest and regain form. Modern-day 
players have no such luxuries as a cramped year-long 
schedule that packs in T20s such as the Indian Premier 
League, means that every overseas trip becomes a rushed 
affair. That Jasprit Bumrah could only play three Tests and 
even Stokes had to skip one at the end, is a reflection of 
how cricketers have no time to pause and remain injury 
prone. Seen in that light, Mohammed Siraj turning out for 
five Tests and bowling with verve and skill, is a huge 
testament of his fitness. India has much to cherish as Gill 
amassed 754 runs, and K.L. Rahul and Yashasvi Jaiswal 
excelled with the bat. Meanwhile, Ravindra Jadeja and 
Washington Sundar offered depth in the batting order, 
even if the tail below wilted. The injury to Rishabh Pant 
was unfortunate but he is bound to return in a while. India 

Editorial                                                   August 5, 2025 
missed Mohammed Shami and much hinged on the fiery 
Siraj, who with 23 wickets, stepped up even as his fellow 
seamers lost their radar at times. A team in transition is 
bound to have teething issues. However, through their 
rugged fight, these players offer hope for better days 
ahead.


Time for action: On the RBI pausing rate cuts 
The Reserve Bank of India did well to pause rate cuts amid the uncertainties 
The Reserve Bank of India's (RBI) Monetary Policy Committee was sensible to pause its rate 
cuts, as announced on Wednesday (August 6, 2025). RBI Governor Sanjay Malhotra rightly 
pointed out that the uncertainties surrounding tariffs are still evolving, and that the 100 bps of 
rate cuts implemented since February 2025 are still percolating through the system. Mr. 
Malhotra's statement was made before U.S. President Donald Trump approved an additional 
25% tariff on imports from India, over and above the existing 25% reciprocal tariffs. However, 
This assessment that the matter is far from over was nevertheless accurate. India is still in the 
process of negotiating a Bilateral Trade Agreement with the U.S., and the final tariffs are far from 
decided. In the meantime, Mr. Trump has already indicated that similar additional tariffs - "penalties" for 
buying oil from Russia - may be imposed on other countries as well, which will impact India's 
comparative advantage. Leaving room for another rate cut later in the year when things might be clearer, 
thus, was the sensible thing to do. The other broad reason why the pause makes sense is that it allows 
the RBI to see whether such monetary measures are working. A 100 bps cumulative cut in rates over 
the last six months is significant, and the banking system needs time to pass that on to borrowers. 
The Governor also pointed out that there is ample liquidity in the system, which means the banks have 
the money to lend. The question, however, is whether there is enough growth-related borrowing 
happening. RBI data show that, as of end-June, loans to purchase consumer durables had contracted 
about 3% compared to the previous year. Growth in housing loans slowed sharply to 9.6% from 36% a 
year earlier, while vehicle loans too slowed by five percentage points over the last year. In line with this 
subdued demand outlook, companies too seem to be slowing their borrowing. Loans to industry grew 
5.5% in June 2025, down from 8.1% in June last year. Simply reducing rates, therefore, is not enough 
and that is something the Governor alluded to when he said stronger policy frameworks "across 
domains, and not just limited to monetary policy", would be pivotal in achieving India's growth potential. 
The government has to intervene in a more focused manner than just increasing capital expenditure 
across the board. A lot can be done through tax. The Goods and Services Tax rate rationalization, that 
was promised several times, is long overdue. A reduction in fuel prices in line with lower oil prices, too, 
will lift consumer sentiment. The RBI can, for the moment, afford to wait things out. The government 
does not have this luxury.