Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 17

Careful curation: On Bihar's Special Intensive Revision of electoral rolls 
Bihar's electoral roll revision risks excluding short-term migrant voters 
ihar's ongoing Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls by the Election 
Commission of India (ECI) has drawn criticism from political parties, and rightly so. The 
enormity of the task, the short duration, and the strict criteria for verification could result in 
the wrongful exclusion of lakhs of voters. The ECI's statement that only ordinary residents 
would qualify for inclusion in the electoral roll has raised concerns, particularly among 
Opposition parties. Critics argue that it would be difficult for migrant voters - an estimated 
20% of Bihar's voting population - to be present for verification during the window that ends 
on July 31, and creates a high probability that they could be struck off the rolls. The Representation of 
the People Act, 1950 states that "A person absenting himself temporarily from his place of ordinary 
residence shall not by reason thereof cease to be ordinarily resident therein", and manuals on electoral 
rolls add that such people will be treated as ordinary residents as long as they possess the ability and 
intention to return. This means that there must be caution in removing the names of migrants, especially 
those who are away from their place of residence for a short period. 
The issue becomes more complicated with long-term migrants. In Bihar's case, there is a significant 
section of the voting-age population, especially males, migrating for work. This becomes evident when 
parsing voting data from the 2024 general election in the State, revealing a unique electoral dynamic. 
Bihar is a State where more women turned out to vote than men in absolute numbers (for every 1,000 
men there were 1,017.5 women), even though there were more registered male electors on the rolls (for 
every 1,000 men, there were only 917.5 women). This electoral dynamic was observed in Jharkhand, 
and to a lesser extent in Himachal Pradesh, but nowhere was the difference starker than in Bihar. There 
is good reason to believe that many of the absentee male electors were registered in their home 
constituencies in Bihar but were unable to return on polling day, drastically lowering the overall 
turnout rate for men. These electors were likely part of a large migrant cohort that included many 
longer-term migrants. The SIR must carefully parse such electors and ensure that only longer-term 
migrants are removed from the rolls - not an easy task. For longer-term migrants, meaningful 
representation requires their vote to be registered where they currently reside and work. Migrant 
workers are integral to the economic engines of several States, and their political voice should be more 
impactful in holding representatives accountable for their everyday challenges there, rather than in their 
native places. The ECI's SIR must balance these principles. Ideally, such a process should take more 
time than the one month that the ECI has allocated for it. 
B


Cease the cess: On the GST and reforms 
Low GST collections speak to the need for structural reforms 
The eighth anniversary of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) in India, on July 1, coincided 
with the poorest tax collections the indirect tax system has seen in some time, highlighting the 
need for structural changes in the system. The latest GST collections stood at ₹1.85 lakh crore 
in June 2025, the lowest in four months. This amount was just 6.2% higher than the collections 
in June 2024, the slowest growth rate in four years. Looking past the gross collections, the 
data show that once refunds are accounted for, the growth in the government's actual collections was 
just 3.3%. Further, the revenue from domestic transactions, excluding imports, was an anaemic 4.6% 
higher than in June last year - barely faster than the average rate of inflation since then. Being a 
consumption tax, a dip in GST collections reflects a dip in economic activity. But it also reflects 
inefficiencies in the system, which must now suitably be addressed eight years on. A common demand 
is for fuel to be included in GST. There is, however, strong resistance to this from State governments, 
since fuel and alcohol are the few sources of revenue States have with them that are independent of the 
Centre. However, this cannot be reason enough to perpetually keep these items excluded. It is 'one 
nation, one tax' after all, and it is high time that the goal was achieved in full. As for the revenue hit to 
States, the Centre must accede to their request for a higher share in central taxes. The Centre must 
also stop increasingly relying on non-shareable cesses for its revenue. For their part, States must resist 
the temptation to use this higher amount on election-oriented untargeted freebies. Trust goes two ways. 
The other popular reform is a reduction in the number of GST rates. This, too, is overdue, and the GST 
Council's fitment and rate-setting committees are examining the issue. Connected to this is the question 
of what is to be done with the GST Compensation Cess, which is levied over and above the 28% slab. It 
was originally intended to compensate States for any losses arising out of GST implementation for a 
period of five years. It was then extended until March 2026 to repay the loan taken by the Centre to pay 
this compensation since the COVID-19 pandemic had disrupted revenues. The Centre should avoid the 
temptation to subsume this cess into the broader GST rates. Instead, with its job done, the cess must be 
removed. Taxation is not just a covenant between the Centre and the States. It is also one with the 
people. Removing a cess that is no longer needed will not only garner public praise but could also 
spur some sorely needed urban consumption. 
T