Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 112

Rational response: On U.S.'s tariffs and statements, India's response 
India has opted for level-headed action in the wake of U.S. tariffs 
The Government of India has so far handled the issue of the 50% tariffs imposed by the U.S. 
with maturity and pragmatism. Despite provocative statements by senior U.S. government 
officials, India has refrained from being baited and has instead stuck to its established 
position. So, while U.S. Trade Adviser Peter Navarro called the Russia-Ukraine war "Modi's 
war", India has remained calm and has instead been preparing on how to deal with the new 
reality of 50% tariffs. At the same time, Indian officials have said that negotiations on a trade 
deal with the U.S., though paused, are not off the table. Even the additional 25% 'penalty' 
tariff imposed on India is not a deal breaker, they have said, even though it renders any trade deal 
inconsequential. This is an eminently practical approach. A knee-jerk cessation of trade talks with the 
U.S. would hurt India further, but the gains from any potential trade deal will also be undone if these 
penalty tariffs remain in place. The messaging by the government to industry, too, has not been of 
denial but of reassurance: they know there is pain coming, and a plan is in the works to alleviate it. The 
solutions seem to be looked at from a suitability point of view, and not for optics. Rather than announce 
flashy fiscal incentives, the government has demonstrated awareness that such incentives would hardly 
make a dent in the face of the 50% tariffs for India while competitors face less than half that. Instead, the 
government is focusing on what it can effectively address, such as the impending liquidity crunch 
exporters are going to face. 
The Centre has been reasonably pragmatic about how to secure the overall economy from the tariff 
impact as well. Exports make up about one-fifth of India's GDP. The U.S. accounts for about one-fifth of 
that, and even within that, about 40% of India's exports to the U.S. will not be affected by the 50% tariffs. 
So, even though the sectoral impact of the tariffs could be quite severe for some sectors, the 
macroeconomic impact is likely to be limited. The dual approach of rekindling dialogues with China, 
while also trying to propel domestic consumption through GST rate cuts should, therefore, go a long 
way in mitigating the hit. There is some talk in the government about easing the norms laid out in the 
COVID-19-era Press Note 3, which curtails Chinese foreign direct investment in India. This should be 
encouraged, with adequate guardrails to ensure national security. The Centre and States must also 
cooperate next week to ensure that the GST rate cuts go through, without compromising too much on 
the States' fiscal health. Now is the time for level-headed action, not emotional outbursts.


Deja vu: on India's monsoon vulnerabilities 
India must reduce monsoon vulnerabilities, not just build response abilities 
eavy rain has left a trail of destruction across North India. Several districts have been cut 
off across Himachal Pradesh. Jammu and Kashmir reported over 40 deaths while swollen 
rivers breached flood marks in Srinagar and Anantnag. In Punjab, entire villages have been 
inundated and farmland has disappeared. The national capital, too, reported excessive 
rainfall and a surging Yamuna. The intensity and the volumes of the southwest monsoon 
have been swinging sharply between the extremes. August's rain has arrived in 
concentrated bursts, overwhelming fragile slopes in the Himalaya, bursting banks in the 
plains, and inundating low-lying regions. This erraticism has cut across geographies in a sign of the 
monsoon's increasing unpredictability. The consequences go beyond immediate damage. Intense rain 
over short periods amplifies local erosion. Mountain slopes destabilize and raise risks for settlements far 
removed. Relief, in this context, cannot be confined to reactive measures. The knowledge that 
concentrated, destructive rainfall is now a recurring possibility makes it imperative for States and the 
Centre to invest in preventive strategies. Continuing to treat such events as unforeseeable emergencies 
is to deny the evidence already at hand. 
Indeed, framing each calamity as "unprecedented" distracts from the lessons that should already have 
been learnt. In Himalayan States, forest clearance and road-widening continue sans adjustments such 
as slope-safe engineering in eco-sensitive zones despite experts warning of irreversibly weakened 
slopes. As catchments' buffering capacity shrinks, the chance of slope failure rises while silt 
accumulates in dams and rivers downstream, worsening the flood load. Yet, despite repeated disasters, 
the early warning and evacuation architecture remains underdeveloped. The capacity to forecast heavy 
rain has improved but it is not being translated into reliable ground-level warnings. Relief agencies 
mobilise once the damage has occurred, but systematic drills, pre-positioned supplies and community 
preparedness remain insufficient. Sadly, States and the Centre continue to pursue strategic road projects 
and urban expansion with urgency, even in landscapes repeatedly flagged as unstable, while climate-
resilient infrastructure lags. Compensatory afforestation and rehabilitation rarely match the qualitative 
attributes of what has been lost. The cumulative effect is visible as denuded slopes, shrinking catchment 
areas, and populations at increasingly higher risk. Relief operations command headlines and budgets but 
unless sustainable infrastructure, landslide mitigation and early-warning systems are pursued equally 
seriously, the next monsoon spell will launch another cycle of loss. Shifting from acclaiming resilience, 
post facto, to systematically reducing vulnerabilities beforehand remains overdue.