Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 45

Landmark agreement: On the draft WHO Pandemic Agreement 
The accord on pathogen access and benefit sharing is path-breaking 
fter nearly three-and-a-half years and 13 rounds of meetings, member-states of the World 
Health Organization (WHO) have agreed on measures to prevent, prepare for and respond 
to pandemics. On April 16, the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body finalized a proposal for 
the WHO Pandemic Agreement. The draft, described as a "generational accord to make the 
world safer", is now ready to be adopted next month by the World Health Assembly. Though 
more limited in scope than the ambitious one first proposed by WHO, it is still a remarkable achievement 
considering the varied priorities and compulsions for the Global North and the developing countries, 
especially with the U.S. not a part of WHO since January. While the developed countries baulked on firm 
commitments to sharing diagnostics, treatments, vaccines and technology transfers, developing 
countries hesitated to commit to sharing pathogen samples and genome sequences without assured 
access to tests, treatments and vaccines developed using the shared material. The disagreements are 
reminiscent of how Indonesia turned the spotlight on the inequitable H5N1 sample sharing mechanism in 
the mid-2000s in the absence of equitable and affordable access to vaccines developed using its 
samples. 
The first article that all countries agreed upon was the commitment to protect health-care workers better. 
The most remarkable achievement was in getting every country to agree on the pathogen access and 
benefit sharing system. Developing countries that share pathogen samples and genome sequence data 
are guaranteed to get access to any diagnostics, vaccines or treatments that are developed using the 
samples/data. Negotiations on how countries will share samples and vaccines/drugs are set to continue. 
Pharmaceutical companies have committed to donate 10% of their production to WHO and offer up to 
another 10% at affordable prices. The COVID-19 pandemic brought the inequitable vaccine distribution 
to the fore. Many developed countries stockpiled vaccines while many developing countries, especially 
those in Africa, were left waiting for vaccines. The case of vaccine manufacturers sharing the technology 
with developing countries during a pandemic has also been sorted out. The main debate centered 
around the conditions under which this transfer will happen. Countries have agreed that technology 
transfer will be on "mutually agreed terms", and not "voluntary" as pharma companies wanted it to be. 
According to the journal, Nature, besides "promoting equitable access to health products, the treaty 
underlines that countries should 'promote and otherwise facilitate or incentivise' the exchange of 
technology and know-how" that will enable developing countries to make their own vaccines. 
A


Good but not enough 
Economic growth accelerated in Q3 but there are still too many uncertainties going 
ahead 
India's economy clearly did better than what the earlier data for FY23 and FY24 suggested. Even in 
the third quarter of FY25, the gross domestic product (GDP) growth has been reasonably good at 
6.2% as it comes on a high base of 9.5%. But there is no denying that the economy has lost 
considerable momentum and will grow much below its potential in the current year and probably 
next year too. In fact, the headwinds from the Trump administration measures in the area of trade 
and tariffs could seriously impact business at home. The economy is now expected to clock in a 
growth of 6.5% for FY25, implying that the March quarter must pull off a number of 7.6% year-on-year 
(y-o-y). That is a tall order even allowing for the Maha Kumbh factor. Even if growth hits 6.5%, it would 
be a four-year low. 
That said, a closer look at the Q3 numbers suggest key segments of the economy are still not pulling 
their weight. Both consumption and investment have been somewhat lacklustre. For instance, in the 
peak festive period, private final consumption expenditure has risen at 6.9% у-о-у, which is not bad 
except that it comes off a modest base. Manufacturers of consumer products have been talking of 
muted demand for many months now. Some high-frequency indicators such as car sales show it's 
mainly the high-end models that are selling well. In general, demand for lower-end products-as reflected 
in their sales - appears to be weak. Between them, inflation and a slower rise in incomes have crimped 
purchasing power. 
Unfortunately, investments remain sluggish. As a share of the GDP, the gross fixed capital formation 
(GFCF) in Q3 was the lowest in 12 quarters having increased by just 5.7% y-o-y. This is a troubling 
signal that the private sector isn't really committing capital to fresh capacities. In fact, the rise in the 
GFCF was the slowest in six quarters. It is actually government expenditure, which went up by a sharp 
8.3% y-o-y, the highest in five quarters, that helped push up growth. On the supply side too, the 
manufacturing space has disappointed for the second straight quarter, albeit on an unfavourable base. It 
is agriculture that did much of the heavy lifting registering an increase of 5.6% y-o-y. That is an 
impressive number but comes off a very favourable base. To be sure, though, it augurs well for rural 
demand. Services like trade and transport have fared reasonably well but this was to be expected in the 
peak festive and holiday season. 
The 6.5% growth estimate for FY25 is predicated on a pick-up in private consumption - probably driven 
by better rural demand. The sharp 17% fall in February car sales, however, is a big concern. Exports, 
which are estimated to report a 7.1% rise this fiscal, driven by services, too are expected to boost the 
GDP. Despite the unfriendly environment, the economy could report a 6.5-6.6% growth in FY 26 with 
consumption holding up on the back of rural recovery, the multiplier effect from the ₹1.1 lakh crore 
income tax giveaway, lower inflation, interest rate cuts, more liquidity, and therefore better credit flows. 
While the Budget has little fiscal impulse, government expenditure is likely to be more front-ended 
boosting both demand and liquidity. The worse may be behind us but the next couple of years don't look 
like they're going to be exciting.