Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 98

Editorial                                                   August 2, 2025 
Deep ties: On India-Maldives ties   
India needs to engage its neighbours more 
closely 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's visit to the 
Maldives last week, after an invitation by Maldives 
President Mohamed Muizzu to be a special guest 
for the country's 60th Independence Day, signalled the full 
return of relations to the closeness they held during the 
previous Ibrahim Solih government. Although the two 
leaders had not gotten off to the best start in 2023, after 
Mr. Muizzu's surprise win, backed by an "India Out" 
campaign - this was followed by a "Boycott Maldives" 
social media campaign in India - they have been on the 
mend for the past year. During Mr. Muizzu's 2024 state 
visit to India, India had announced measures including 
lines of credit and a currency swap arrangement to 
support the Maldives during its economic troubles. Mr. 
Muizzu reflected gratitude when he described India's role 
in the Maldives as "pivotal" and Mr. Modi reciprocated the 
warmth. India announced a line of credit worth $565 
P 

Editorial                                                   August 2, 2025 
million (₹4,850 crore) and reduced the annual debt 
burden for Maldives on previous Indian lines of credit by 
40%. There was also the launch of India-Maldives Free 
Trade Agreement negotiations, which will be a significant 
driver of future engagement. There was the signing too of 
MoUs for cooperation in fisheries, meteorological 
sciences, digital solutions and pharma, as well as a digital 
and rupee-rufiyaa national currency payments agreement. 
Over the past six decades, India has cultivated a strong 
security partnership with the Maldives, including trilateral 
national security consultations with Sri Lanka, and it is 
significant that after Mr. Modi's visit, Mr. Muizzu 
welcomed 
Sri 
Lankan 
President 
Anura 
Kumara 
Dissanayake for a state visit. 
The Maldives visit was also a reaffirmation of the 
importance of India's "Neighbourhood First" policy, at a 
time when Indian foreign policy is facing headwinds linked 
to the U.S.'s trade tariffs and the conflicts in Ukraine and 
Gaza. The conflict with Pakistan after the Pahalgam 
attacks, and tensions with Bangladesh have engaged the 
government's attention. New Delhi has also been 
preoccupied with reaching out to different countries, 

Editorial                                                   August 2, 2025 
following Operation Sindoor, but did not send delegations 
to neighbouring countries. It is heartening that New Delhi 
is preparing to welcome Nepal Prime Minister K.P. Sharma 
Oli, who has not been invited to India since he took office 
a year ago. A commemorative stamp by the Maldives for 
its national day celebrations showed traditional Indian and 
Maldives boats, which Mr. Modi described as a reflection 
of India and the Maldives being not just neighbours "but 
also fellow voyagers on a shared journey". In a time of 
global economic turmoil, a closer engagement with the 
neighbours - one that shores up their economic needs 
and supports their plans for development where possible 
- is essential.


Editorial                                                   August 1, 2025 
Soured relations: On Trump's 25% tariff, 
'penalty' 
The higher U.S. tariffs place India at a relative 
disadvantage 
The 25% tariff "plus penalty" on imports of Indian 
goods in the United States, announced by President 
Donald Trump, should have come as no surprise to 
India. Mr. Trump has, for a while now, been voicing his 
displeasure at India's dealings with Russia, with regard to 
energy dealings and military equipment. He has also been 
quite vocal about India's high tariff and non-tariff barriers. 
These were the reasons he cited in his announcement on 
Wednesday. Add to this these facts - first, U.S. Trade 
Representative Jamieson Greer, as recently as Monday, 
had said that a trade deal with India needed "some more 
negotiations", and second, Indian Commerce Ministry 
officials had stopped talking about a mini-deal for a while 
now. Thus, the writing on the wall was pretty clear: a deal 
before August 1 was not in the offing. The only uncertainty 
in this mix was the mercurial Trump, but he has finally 
T

Editorial                                                   August 1, 2025 
made his position clear. However, while there was an 
expectation that a mini-deal would not materialise, 
something does seem to have shifted in India-U.S. 
relations. This is showing up now in Mr. Trump's language 
- as a snide remark on Thursday about Pakistan selling oil 
to India in the future, or he, even more recently, calling the 
Indian economy "dead". Whether this was him venting his 
frustration at not being able to secure a deal with India - 
after calling himself the "Dealmaker in Chief" - or 
whether something else has triggered him is not clear yet. 
The fact is that both sides have not budged from their core 
policies. The U.S. wants India to reduce its tariffs and 
provide market access across the board and India has held 
firm about ring-fencing agriculture and dairy. 
All of this makes negotiating a potential bilateral trade 
agreement (BTA) that much more complicated. Where 
government officials have constantly changed deadlines 
for a mini-deal, they have been remarkably consistent 
about meeting the Fall deadline for the BTA. But now Mr. 
Trump has linked India's dealings with Russia to India's 
trade relations with the U.S. Who India does business with 
is a sovereign matter, and the Ministry of Commerce and 

Editorial                                                   August 1, 2025 
Industry rightfully reiterated its commitment to securing 
India's national interest. On the other hand, the U.S. 
accounts for around a fifth of India's exports. The 25% 
tariffs plus a yet-unknown penalty places India at a relative 
disadvantage when compared to competitors such as 
South Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and 
Vietnam. Trade associations representing several sectors 
have already voiced their concern. Indian negotiators will 
have to work doubly hard to conclude an acceptable deal.