Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 73

Turn and churn: On caste count and next Census 
A caste census should not be allowed to ossify social segmentation 
The Centre's decision to include caste enumeration in the next national Census marks a sharp 
departure for the ruling BJP from its previous position. Prime Minister Narendra Modi had in 
2024 targeted the Congress election manifesto promise of a caste census as a reflection of its 
'urban Naxal' thinking. During the general election last year, BJP leaders had asked the 
people for a massive Lok Sabha majority to remodel the Constitution. This promise of a 
constitutional overhaul was seen by OBC and Dalit groups as a threat to dismantle caste reservations, 
and partly explains why the BJP fell short of an electoral majority. In 2015, the RSS chief's call for a 
debate on caste-based reservation led to setbacks for the BJP in the Bihar Assembly elections. The 
Maharashtra and Haryana Assembly election victories in 2024 suggested that the BJP's plank of Hindu 
unity, and its resistance to caste-based politics, continued to retain electoral salience. But, as it turns out, 
the BJP was probably unsure of its electoral ground and feared or sensed an undercurrent in favour of 
caste census that it could no longer politically ignore, particularly in Bihar which will vote later this year. 
It is now a race to claim credit. The BJP and the Opposition have accused each other of undermining 
social justice. National formations, which include the BJP, the Congress and the Left, have historically 
taken an ambiguous, if not hostile, view towards caste claims. Subaltern parties that mobilized OBC and 
Dalit groups in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar displaced all national parties from these States in the 1990s. The 
BJP responded by turning more inclusive towards the OBCs, that has culminated in its continuing 
electoral dominance since 2014. The Congress, under Rahul Gandhi, started espousing caste justice, in 
a remarkable turn in the party's history. Apart from a caste census, Mr. Gandhi now seeks the removal of 
the 50% ceiling in reservations, and an expansion of reservation in private educational institutions. 
Though there is no evidence yet that the Congress has or will make electoral gains from the new stirring, 
it is evident that the BJP is worried. The counting of castes and communities unleashed social forces in 
colonial India that continue till date, and a comprehensive caste count, the first since 1931, is set to 
unmake and remake many political and social realities. A caste census would not automatically result in 
reservation according to population figures, which is obnoxious; as Article 16(4) of the Constitution 
makes it clear, special provision for reservation in favour of any backward class can be made only if such 
community is inadequately represented in public services. A caste census should not be allowed to 
ossify social divisions, but only used to better target benefits of affirmative action. 
T


Trumpeting claims: On the U.S. President's claims, India and Pakistan 
Donald Trump's exaggerated claims undermine India's Kashmir policy 
or the fifth time in as many days the U.S. President has claimed credit for bringing India and 
Pakistan back from "nuclear conflict" by mediating the May 10 ceasefire agreement, a claim 
that is puzzling and problematic. The claim of mediation has been rebutted by the Ministry 
of External Affairs (MEA), unofficially and more formally several times, with officials giving a 
timeline of how the talks had been held "directly" between the Directors General of Military 
Operation (DGMO) on a hotline, after the Pakistani DGMO proposed a stop to hostilities three 
days after Operation Sindoor began, and India acceded to the request. The government has 
said that Pakistan's request came after it received a jolt over India's strikes on Pakistani bases. It has 
also said that like many countries, the U.S. was engaged with the situation, and officials including Prime 
Minister Narendra Modi, External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar and National Security Adviser Ajit Doval 
had kept them apprised of India's position. Mr. Trump's assertions, backed by his administration, have 
been a cause for obvious outrage in Delhi, as they violate India's "long-stated" principle of not 
accepting third-party mediation on bilateral issues. His other comments, including an offer to mediate to 
resolve the Kashmir dispute and the equivalence he draws between India and Pakistan, also go against 
India's previously well-respected policies against the internationalisation of an "internal issue" and the 
hyphenation with Pakistan. Moreover, the MEA spokesperson has categorically denied that any trade-
related issues were discussed between Indian and U.S. interlocutors, even as Mr. Trump has repeated 
that he had prevailed on India and Pakistan to put aside their "nuclear missiles" by threatening to stop 
trade with them if they did not, and promising to enhance trade ties if they did. That Mr. Trump has not 
once referred to India's core concerns on terrorism, appeared to swallow the Pakistani narrative on a 
"nuclear war", and even suggested a "dinner" between Mr. Modi and Pakistan Prime Minister Shehbaz 
Sharif, trivialises the serious nature of the rupture between Delhi and Islamabad. 
New Delhi must also analyse what lies behind Mr. Trump's obvious shift from the camaraderie on 
display with Mr. Modi just months ago. Are the comments explained as simply "Trump being Trump", or 
is he sending a more considered message on U.S. policy for the region? The extent of the China-
Pakistan political and military cooperation may also have caused some alarm in the U.S. India must 
make it clear that its battle against cross-border terrorism from Pakistan cannot be brushed aside by any 
country, especially if it is one of India's closest partners, and co-founder of the Quad. The U.S. 
President's statements have not just challenged India's narrative or policy principles but also questioned 
New Delhi's credibility, and some tough messaging will be required to clear the air convincingly on the 
issue.