Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 99

Editorial                                                   August 4, 2025 
Making school fee regulation work 
elhi's draft legislation to regulate fees charged by 
private unaided schools is a recognition of some 
realities of the school education landscape in the 
national capital. First, given private unaided schools' share 
of student strength (almost 40%, as per UDISE+ data), they 
are a critical pillar of school education in the national 
capital territory (NCT). So, some degree of oversight is 
needed. Second, grievances around fee-setting and hikes 
have found groundswell over the past few years, making 
policy intervention by the government necessary. Claims 
of arbitrariness in these decisions came against the 
backdrop of 15-18% annual hikes announced by some 
schools charging six-figure fees. Defined metrics for 
deciding fees, along with a rulebook on compliance and 
penalty - as prescribed by the Bill - could help address the 
issue. And third, there was a need for parent participation 
in fee decisions so that the concerns of this stakeholder 
group don't go unheard and unheeded.  
The Bill provides for parents' representation in the fee 
committees - in the first two tiers of a three-tiered system. 
D 

Editorial                                                   August 4, 2025 
The proposed regime must ensure it doesn't curtail 
schools' autonomy to the extent that it significantly 
impacts their operations. The criticism of the proposed 
15% threshold for impacted parent numbers when it 
comes to challenging a school-level fee committee 
decision needs to be weighed against this tenet. The 
concerns of both parties - parents and school 
management - have to be heard. It is only a robust 
government school system - in terms of density, 
enrolment, outcomes delivered, student diversity, and 
teacher/pedagogy quality - that can bring about this 
balance. Private schools have to be an option available to 
students, not the only alternative to underperforming 
government schools. Competition in education must 
include public schools also to check the tendency for 
profiteering.


Sleeping disasters: On the Uttarakhand disaster, the Himalayas 
Governments must monitor silt accumulation at vulnerable points 
The disaster in Uttarkashi district of Uttarakhand serves as a reminder of the permanent risk of 
destabilization in the Himalayas. At least four persons were killed and at least 60 people are 
feared washed away after a mass of water, debris and muck triggered by torrential rain hit the 
Kheer Ganga river on Tuesday afternoon. The flood hit hotels and residential buildings in 
Dharali town, situated 8,600 feet above sea level, where video footage recorded by residents 
showed giant waves of water gushing through the area, engulfing people and homes. Several 
Indian Army personnel are also feared dead, according to preliminary reports. 
The proximate cause of the disaster is the extremely heavy rainfall from August 3 to 5, with some parts 
of the district reporting nearly 30 cm of rainfall over a single day due to the monsoon and its active phase 
over North India. The fury and the volume of the water that gushed through the town seemed to suggest 
that this was a sudden event, prompting State officials to categorize it as a 'cloudburst'. However, this 
has a very specific meaning in how the India Meteorological Department (IMD), the official forecaster, 
defines it. A large volume of rain, of at least 10 centimetres in an hour over 10 square kilometres, is 
what usually qualifies as a cloudburst. The lack of weather radars at those altitudes means that the IMD 
is incapable of such a computation.  
Therefore, it could very well be that continuous heavy rain over the past 48 hours may have loosened the 
soil and combined with the craggy, undulating terrain, unleashed large volumes of silt along with 
copious amounts of water. Whether it was a sudden event or the result of a gradual build-up might 
seem only of academic interest, given the loss of life, livelihood and property. The knee-jerk 
categorisation as a 'cloudburst' allows state authorities to claim helplessness. Once it is projected as a 
freak phenomenon, the event only elicits social media commiseration from public authorities in the form 
of 'prayers' and 'deep sadness' and a pre-defined token sum as disbursement. The recent past shows 
that these are anything but outliers. Climate change has increased the probability of extreme rainfall 
events and, therefore, the numerous infrastructure projects undertaken in the hills and the resulting 
debris act as latent explosives that are triggered from such rainfall. Following relief operations, the State 
government must - as soon as conditions are conducive - review debris and silt accumulation at 
critical points in the State to buffer the inevitable damage from climate change.