Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 92

Common goals: On India and a five-nation tour 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visits reflect India's efforts to engage with others of 
the Global South 
In his way to Brazil to attend the ongoing BRICS summit, Prime Minister Narendra Modi 
has made back-to-back bilateral visits to Ghana, Trinidad and Tobago, and Argentina. 
Each stop was with a view to enhancing bilateral cooperation in fields which included some 
common themes on pharmaceuticals and vaccines, digital technology, food security and 
critical minerals. In Accra, India-Ghana ties were upgraded to a comprehensive 
partnership, with discussions on helping Ghana become a "vaccine hub" for West Africa. In the Port of 
Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, there was a major MoU on "Indian pharmacopeia", to improve access to 
quality and affordable generic medicines from India. In Buenos Aires, President Javier Milei agreed to 
enhance cooperation on critical minerals as well as Argentina's vast reserves of shale gas and oil, 
while India pitched its pharma to Argentina. The three stops were in countries of the "developing world" 
or the Global South, and the onward journey to Brazil, and then to Namibia, also highlight India's 
commitment to building alternative economic mechanisms to the "developed world" or Global North. 
India's offer of cooperation for low-cost solutions to global challenges includes the promotion of India-
led international organisations such as the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI) to 
these countries. Mr. Modi also made his signature pitch to the Indian diaspora - his speech in the Port 
of Spain, where Indian labour was brought by British colonial ventures since 1845, is one to note. 
Referring to the Indian ancestry of President Christine Carla Kangaloo and Prime Minister Kamla 
Persad-Bissessar, Mr. Modi said that the 35 million Indian diaspora worldwide were India's "pride". 
It is also impossible to escape the deep connections between India and the five nations in terms of 
political history. Each country shares a bond - colonies that suffered under British, Spanih, 
Portuguese and German forces - and why some of them joined the Non-Aligned Movement. They have 
all, at various points, committed to building South-South cooperation, and India and Brazil's role in 
founding the BRIC mechanism, along with Russia and China, and IBSA with South Africa, was an 
outcome, strongly pitching the interests of the Global South. None of the countries on the tour can be 
called "anti-West", and New Delhi has had some differences with them over specific conflicts (Ukraine 
and Gaza). The motivating force behind the ties, however, and consequently Mr. Modi's nine-day 
itinerary, is more about a common desire to look beyond the present global order to one that is more 
equal, representative, and sensitive to the needs of developing and under-developed nations. 
O


Quick fix: On India's Research Development and Innovation scheme 
Budgetary allowances alone won't solve India's R&D problem 
The Union Cabinet recently approved a ₹1-lakh crore Research Development and Innovation 
(RDI) scheme that aims to incentivise the private sector to invest in basic research. The 
scheme will primarily consist of a special purpose fund established within the Anusandhan 
National Research Foundation (ANRF), which will act as the custodian of funds. The funds 
will be in the form of low-interest loans. The ANRF is conceived as an independent institutional 
body, with oversight by the Science Ministry, to allocate funds for basic research and to incentivise 
private sector participation in core research. The involvement of the ANRF here is a novel move as the 
newly created organisation is meant to be the equivalent of a single-window clearance mechanism for 
funding research and development for universities and academic institutions. It is also expected to get 
about 70% of its budget from private sources. In sum, through the RDI and the ANRF, the government is 
looking to stake the bold claim that it has played its part and that it is now up to the private sector to 
come forward and reverse the ratio from where the government today accounts for about 70% of India's 
R&D spend. However, already incipient in the government's tall ambitions are traces of what has 
caused previous such schemes to falter. The first of these is conservatism. 
It turns out that a condition for availing funds is that only products that have reached a certain level of 
development and market potential or, what are called Technology Readiness Level-4 (TRL-4) projects, 
would be eligible. There are nine TRL levels, a hierarchy that was first conceived by the United States' 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in the 1970s. TRL-1 represents a basic level of 
research and TRL-9 a state of advanced readiness. TRL-4 appears to be an arbitrary decision to 
support any promising research that has progressed halfway. Were there such a magic sauce, venture 
capital industries, premised on the fickleness of predicting the 'next big thing', would not exist. The 
scheme also seems to forget that technologically advanced countries have become what they are 
because of their military industrial complexes - where the spectre of war incentivises the development 
of technology that is risky and expensive but, over time, may prove to be of immense civilian value - 
examples are the Internet or the Global Positioning System. India continues to haemorrhage scientists 
to the West due to the lack of opportunities commensurate with their training. Finally, it lacks a deeply 
skilled manufacturing sector that can make the products that scientists conceive of. Budgetary 
allowances cannot overnight fix that which requires major surgery. 
T