Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 117

Questionable cheer: On GDP growth numbers 
The government might find it difficult to meet its fiscal deficit targets 
The GDP growth numbersreleased on Friday (August 29, 2025), showing that growth in Q1 of 
this financial year stood at 7.8%, cameas a pleasant surprise at a time when most of the 
commentary has been about the factors holding growth back. For instance, even the Reserve 
Bank of India, as recently as August 6, 2025, had predicted that growth would be at 6.5% in 
Q1. It was off by a significant 1.3 percentage points less than a month before the data came 
out, something it must introspect about. Within the data, the strong manufacturing sector growth, of 
7.7%, was especially heartening given that it came on a relatively high base of 7.6% in Q1 of last year. 
Some commentators have said that this is because companies were ramping up production and exports 
ahead of the August tariff deadline by the U.S. However, given that merchandise exports grew just 1.6% 
in Q1, the more likely reason is that companies were catering to domestic demand. However, the 
numbers released by the government do not provide much clarity here. The manufacturing sector, as 
measured by the Index of Industrial Production, grewat 3.3% in Q1, slower than the 4.3% seen in Q1 
last year. Steel consumption was drastically slower in Q1 this year than last year. Both private and 
commercial vehicle sales actually contracted 5.4% and 0.6%, respectively, in Q1. Railway freight traffic 
grew by 2.5% versus 5% last year, while air freight grew at 5.4% compared to 13.9% last year. Two-
wheeler vehicle sales contracted 6.2% while three-wheeler sales were flat at 0.1% growth. Diverse data 
show that the core and consumer sectors were slowing, and so the pickup in the manufacturing sector is 
worth a deep examination. The strong performance by the services sector is welcome, and shows how 
dependent the Indian economy is on this sector. 
Chief Economic Adviser V. Anantha Nageswaran has said that the government was retaining its 6.3%-
6.8% growth prediction for the year. This means that, with 7.8% in Q1, the government expects growth to 
significantly slow down in the remaining three quarters, despite its statements about the limited impact of 
the U.S. tariffs. The data also call into question the robustness of the statistical system, since a nominal 
GDP growth of 8.8% assumes that inflation was just 1% in Q1. Clearly, price levels are not being 
captured adequately. A relatively low nominal growth rate also makes it more challenging for the 
government to meet its fiscaldeficit targets, especially at a time when it expects a revenue hit due to 
the upcoming GST rate cuts. Overall, the GDP numbers have brought cheer, but also several questions. 
T


Cuts in time: On the new GST system 
The GST rate cuts will boost consumption at a time when exports face challenges 
The sweeping changes to the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, authorized by the GST 
Council on Wednesday (September 3, 2025), have come as a shot in the arm for the mood 
of the people, and, potentially, for the economy overall. Few things spur optimism and 
demand as effectively as tax cuts. The Centre did well to push the GST Council towards these 
reforms, which rose to the occasion and cleared them quickly. Criticism that these reforms 
have come too late is neither here nor there. The GST Council is a federal body, and any of the States 
could have suggested these rate cuts earlier but did not. The appropriateness of the Prime Minister's 
announcement of the reforms in his Independence Day speech, coming as it did before either the 
relevant Group of Ministers or the GST Council met, can be questioned. But here, too, the fact that the 
Council announced its decisions on the first day of what was supposed to be a two-day meeting shows 
that the States were on board. The minutes of the 56th meeting will reveal each member's stated 
position. The rate changes span nearly every sector, and are, overwhelmingly, in the downward 
direction. Very few items, such as high-end motorcycles and higher priced apparel, are set to become 
more expensive. Tempting as it was to pack the 40% bracket with more items, the GST Council did well 
to keep it narrow. Overall, these rate cuts, coupled with the income-tax rate cuts announced in Budget 
2025, should serve as a much-needed boost to consumption at a time when other engines of growth 
such as exports and private investment are sputtering. 
The government has maintained that the revenue implication of these GST rate cuts would be around 
₹48,000 crore a year, based on 2023-24 consumption data. Given the scope of the cuts, this seems like 
an underestimation. However, only time will tell what the actual number will be. It is to be noted that the 
GST Council decided to do away with the compensation cess, despite Opposition-governed States 
calling for one to protect their revenues. Such a cess would have diluted the rate rationalization and 
simplification efforts and is best eschewed. Instead, the States are now going to have to look to their 
own revenue sources, as well as the 16th Finance Commission, to offset the losses they face. The new 
GST 2.0 still has some anomalies, and is still more complicated than it needs to be, but the removal of 
duty inversions and the easing of paperwork are a huge improvement. The government should now 
revive the National Anti-Profiteering Authority, at least temporarily, to ensure that the rate cuts are 
passed on once they kick in on September 22. 
T