Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 33

Closer than ever: On India-Qatar bilateral bonhomie 
India and Qatar have deepened their ties despite differences 
The visitof the Qatari Amir, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, a decade after his last visit to 
India, hasled to a reaffirmation of the deep ties between two countries. While they do not 
always share the same worldview, both countries recognize each other's importance on the 
regional and global stage. For Qatar, India is a globally connected power, maintaining a 
balance with all players in the West Asian region including Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Iran and 
Israel. Indian expatriates are often seen as the backbone of Qatari economic activity. For 
India, Qatar is a Gulf power, a huge source of remittances and a partner with a major geo-strategic 
role. Qatar also provides 45% of India's LNG needs, which makes up about half of the bilateral trade of 
$15 billion between the two countries. While Qatar is home to a U.S. military base, which houses the 
U.K. and Australian air forces, it has also hosted groups such as the Hamas and the Taliban, and 
maintains ties with regional militia groups. In its recent decision to broaden its engagement with the 
Taliban regime in Afghanistan, the Narendra Modi government has leaned on the Qatari leadership. In 
addition, the Qatari Amir's decisionto pardon eight former Indian naval personnel, reportedly accused of 
spying and handed the death sentence in 2023, hashelped forge a closer understanding. It is fitting and 
long overdue, therefore, that after the talks in Delhi, India and Qatar decided to upgrade ties to a 
strategic partnership, given that India already has strategic partnerships signed with the Gulf 
Cooperation Council including the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Oman and Kuwait. They also signed a double 
taxation avoidance agreement and MoUs in areas including sports and youth affairs. They agreed to 
double bilateral trade by 2030, and Qatar is to invest $10 billion in India in infrastructure and 
manufacturing sectors and other areas.  
While the joint statement and readouts dwelt on the bilateral bonhomie, the geopolitical undertonesof 
their summitcannotbe ignored. The Qatari Amir's visit comes amidst turmoil in the Gulf region over the 
Israel-Gaza conflict and U.S. President Donald Trump's outrageous plan to clear two million 
Palestinians from their homeland in the name of regional peace. Every country in the Gulf region has 
voiced its opposition to the Trump announcement, and New Delhi's relative silence has been noted. 
While the joint statement said that both sides conveyed their respective positions on the "Israel-Hamas 
issue", it did not detail those positions. As Arab, GCC and OIC members meet this week to discuss the 
challenge from developments in Gaza, the India-Qatar talks may have delivered the opportunity for both 
sides to bridge that divide between them, even as Delhi and Doha committed to a much stronger, 
forward-looking bilateral partnership.


Watering down: On water quality at Prayagraj 
Pollution in Ganga needs long-term solutions, not denialism 
fficial estimates suggest that around 45 crore visitors, nearly a third of India's population, 
havealready been to Prayagraj for the Maha Kumbh Mela, which began in mid-January. 
With such a massive influx, even a small percentageof individuals who carry 
microbescouldtrigger extensive chains of disease transmission. TheGangaat Prayagraj, 
where devotees not only have ritual baths but also drink the water, inevitablybecomesa complex 
receptacle of microbiomes. The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), which is responsible for 
monitoring and controlling air, water and land pollution, hasbeen assessing water quality at Prayagraj 
since the festival began. Its reports, which are publicly accessible, presenta mixed picture. On January 
14, which was Makar Sankranti, one of the most auspicious bathing days, faecal coliform levels, a key 
indicator of contamination from human and animal waste, wereat a high - nearly 11,000 units at the 
Sangam Ghat, which is more than four times the permissible limit of 2,500 units. At the Old Naini Bridge 
Ghat, along the Yamuna, the count was even higher, at 33,000 units. However, on other days, these 
numbers dropped to as low as 200 and 780 units. Similar fluctuations were observed for other 
parameters of water quality such as biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and dissolved oxygen (DO). A 
CPCB report submitted to the National Green Tribunal on February 3 stated that the water qualityon 
January 12-13, 2025 wasnot fit for bathing, let alone drinking, despite bathing having a higher tolerance 
limit. However, the report also noted a reduction in organic pollution due to freshwater intrusion 
upstream. It further observed that the sheer numberof people bathing in the river during the Maha 
Kumbh Mela, particularly on auspicious days, ledto an inevitable spike in faecal contamination. 
These fluctuations are not exclusive to the Kumbh Mela. Routine monitoringof water quality by the CPCB 
hasconsistently recorded similar patterns, reinforcing the fact that, regardless of what the festival may 
be, waterin the Ganga at Prayagraj isnot fit for consumption, whether as a few drops or bucketful. The 
river's suitability for bathing fluctuates based on water flow and dilution. Considering these adverse 
findings, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's dismissalof this scientific data as "baseless" 
ismisleading. The National Mission for Clean Ganga is based on a sustained effort to restore the river's 
health, and Uttar Pradesh,its largest beneficiary, mustprioritise continuous cleanup efforts instead of 
undermining legitimate pollution concerns. The Kumbh Mela highlights the urgent need for long-term 
solutions, not denialism. Science can come to the aid of the faithful; it is in no one's interest to undermine 
scientific findings in the name of encouraging a spiritual journey. 
O