Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 95

Too close for comfort: On America's tariff and U.S.-Canada ties 
Canada is looking for new friends after the Trump-induced uncertainty 
In July 10, U.S. President Donald Trump announced a 35% tariff on Canadian imports, 
despite Ottawa rescinding a 3% digital services tax (DST) that was to go into effect on 
June 30; Mr. Trump had dubbed this as an 'attack on American firms'. Canada expected 
that it would generate about $5 billion from DST on revenues from Canadian-source digital 
services over five years dating it back to January 1, 2022. The 35% tax was imposed 
despite ongoing trade talks, which Canada was hoping would result in a trade deal by July 21 - as 
agreed upon between Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney and Mr. Trump on the sidelines of the G-7 
summit in mid-June. The new 35% tax, that was conveyed to Mr. Carney through a letter, which Mr. 
Trump sent to more than 20 U.S. trading partners, is likely to exempt items compliant under the 2018 
United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement. Canada and the U.S. are each other's largest trading 
partners. In fact, despite Mr. Trump's constant refrain about the flow of fentanyl, the opioid coming 
through America's northern borders (less than 0.1% of what lands in the U.S.), what has rankled the 
American President is the trade surplus of about $63 billion in Canada's favour. This on-again-off again 
approach to tariffs as a stick against America's trading partners has forced even steadfast allies such as 
Canada to scramble to diversify. Hours before receiving Mr. Trump's letter, Mr. Carney posted a picture 
of himself with British Prime Minister Keir Starmer on X, saying, "... the world is turning to reliable 
economic partners like Canada." 
America's action against Canada brings to mind a similar episode about a decade ago between close 
neighbours, India and Nepal. India closed land ports following the enactment of Nepal's new Constitution 
citing fears about the treatment of the minority Madhesi community that has had close ties to India. This 
action crippled Nepal's land-locked economy that was entirely reliant on Indian ports such as Kolkata 
and Visakhapatnam for its trade. Acute fuel and medicine shortages followed. Nepal's GDP collapsed 
from 3.3% in FY15 to 0.2% in FY16, and Nepalis began harbouring a deep resentment toward India. 
New Delhi's move forced Nepal to recalibrate its foreign and economic policy, eventually leading it to 
join China's Belt and Road Initiative in 2017 and accepting massive infrastructure funds from Beijing, 
much to New Delhi's dismay. This episode, between two vastly different nations, would serve 
Washington well to realise that mending a trade imbalance must not come at the expense of losing one 
of its closest allies with deep running cultural and linguistic ties, as Canada, with an economy that is one-
eleventh that of the U.S. albeit with a trade surplus, now attempts to redraw its foreign and economic 
strategies. 
O


Need for a revamp: On the Ahmedabad air crash probe, aviation safety 
India's aviation industry must review crew resource management 
The preliminary report flowing from the investigation into the crash of an Air India Boeing 
787-8 at Ahmedabad, on June 12, 2025, has a focal point now. Released in the early hours of 
July 12, 2025, a month after the accident, the Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau's 15-page 
document has highlighted the fuel control switches of "Engine 1 and Engine 2" having 
"transitioned from the 'Run' to the 'Cutoff' position, one after another, with a time gap of one 
second". That this happened just after flight AI171 had begun to lift off from the 3,505-metre-long 
runway, leading to the engines beginning to decrease from their take-off values as fuel starvation hit, has 
accentuated another detail. How did two separate switches that are guarded by brackets, feature a 
metal stop locking mechanism and have separate systems for redundancy move to 'cutoff'? And why? 
The element of bafflement by one crew member, and denial by the other pilot, over the cutoff, has 
compounded the issue, more so in the absence of the full and raw transcript of the cockpit voice 
recording. However, in the midst of the crisis, what must be acknowledged was a display of airmanship, 
with a partially successful relighting of the GEnx-1B70/75/P2 engines, which ended with the call of May 
Day. 
While the key details in the report have evoked appeals by a pilot body for a revamped probe, especially 
to 'stop the bias towards pilot error', the investigation team must now stay the course to ensure that 
there is a sound, comprehensive and transparent investigation. There has also been focus on an FAA 
Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin of 2018 that concerns the potential for disengagement of 
the fuel control switch locking feature, and applicable to the Boeing 787 aircraft family. In a reaction to 
the preliminary report and its findings, there has been some expert commentary on the topic of crew 
well-being, but in a counter to this, the Indian Commercial Pilots' Association has said that "pilots 
undergo extensive psychological and professional screening... and operate under the highest standards 
of safety". However, the subject of Crew Resource Management and Line Oriented Flight Training may 
need to be revamped, more so with this being an unusual incident of dual engine failure. Finally, despite 
the preliminary report's pitch of there "not being recommended actions that concern the aircraft type and 
the engine manufacturer", India's expanding civil aircraft fleet requires greater vigilance in terms of 
maintenance and operations. Airport funnel zones and obstacle limitations must be reviewed too as it is 
a given that air crew and passengers have safer flights. 
T