Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 51

Persuasion strategy: On the civil defence preparedness drills 
Pakistan must hand over designated terrorists to India 
or the first time in over 50 years, India has been told that it is on the threshold of a full-scale 
war. The drills seek to bring that war into the people's consciousness, not as a media event but 
as a way of preparing them for what could unfold in their lives. Civil defence preparedness is a 
key element of war strategy. These drills will help to take stock of how common people, those 
responsible for key civil assets and trained personnel, will interact and act in a war-like 
situation. Defence preparedness is another matter altogether. The government led by Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi has not baulked at national, war-like mobilisations. From demonetisation through Swachh 
Bharat to the lights off during COVID-19 that also tested electric grid resilience, there have been many 
projects that have sought to tell the people that they have to be in mission-mode. Grid resilience is once 
again being tested by the drills through blackouts. 
Wars and war-like simulations can serve to bring up consciousness and produce more social 
cohesiveness and a focus on common, larger goals. They can prepare the people for hardships without 
their losing morale. The other side is, of course, destruction. In the eyes of many, including possibly the 
government, Pahalgam was India's 9/11, if not in its scale but in the response. This view holds that 
Pakistan is the Afghanistan of 2001 - a nation coming apart with only religious zealots holding it 
together using terror as the only statecraft. George W. Bush's "I hear you" in the rubble of the World 
Trade Center was followed by a blitzkrieg that sought to bomb the nation into the Stone Age. The U.S. 
had zero risk of any retaliation then. Prime Minister Narendra Modi's promise to pursue terrorists to the 
end of the earth comes with the risk of a furious retaliation if the pursuit means full-fledged war. While 
testing civil defence preparedness is one thing, a real war is a highly dangerous escalation that will do 
little good to the narrative of India being an economic powerhouse ready to take its place in a multipolar 
world as a true and responsible leader. The government must keep its options open so that Pakistan 
may be persuaded to walk back from the brink by agreeing to hand over terror leaders of the LeT, JeM 
and fringe outfits. India's non-muscular response to 26/11 brought much shame to Pakistan and the 
Pakistani media willingly brought more shame to its government by turning its focus on Ajmal Kasab's 
village and family. Perhaps the civil defence preparedness drills will serve as psy-ops, signalling India's 
intent that could make Pakistan see the folly of using terror as a tactic in geopolitical disputes. 
F


Caution and optimism: On India's FTA with the United Kingdom 
The FTA with the United Kingdom should not elbow out India's farmers 
The Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between India and the United Kingdom marks a strong 
step towards securing India's bilateral ties in an increasingly fragmented global trade 
environment. The key highlight for India is that 99% of its exports will attract no duties. Apart 
from being hailed by business leaders, industry associations representing sectors such as 
engineering goods, apparel, and gems and jewellery - each among the top Indian exports to 
the U.K. - have expressed strong optimism for future trade growth. Engineering exports, for 
example, are expected to nearly double to $7.55 billion by 2029-30, according to the 
Engineering Exports Promotion Council of India. Overall bilateral trade is expected to double to $120 
billion by 2030. The other major win is that Indian workers temporarily working in the U.K. and their 
employers will be exempt from making social security contributions for three years. This is likely to ease 
the hiring of Indian workers in the U.K. The FTA also eases the movement of professionals and 
investors, which should go some way in reviving India's flagging foreign direct investment levels. On 
the flip side, India has agreed to cut its tariffs on 90% of the tariff lines imported from the U.K., with 
85% of these to be reduced to zero tariff within a decade. While the reduction in automotive tariffs is 
unlikely to meaningfully change the price-conscious behaviour of Indians, the slashing of import duties 
on whiskey and gin will increase competition in India and perhaps slow the ongoing premiumisation 
trend. 
Although the Modi government has been quick to criticise the FTAs signed by the UPA for putting India 
at a disadvantage, some of its own FTAs have faced the same issue. The India-UAE CEPA (2022), for 
example, has seen India's trade balance worsen over the years. The FTA with Australia, too, has not 
resulted in gains for Indian exports. Indian farmer organisations - opposed to the U.K. FTA since 
talks began - are up in arms over the reduced tariffs on lamb and salmon and other edible products. 
Here, too, the government must act to ensure that India's farmers, already in a low-income, low-margin 
situation, are not elbowed out. Then, there is the fact that trade experts agree that the India-U.K. FTA will 
be the template for future agreements with the EU and the U.S. India must be careful here. While the 
U.K. is a relatively small trading partner, the EU and the U.S. deals - when they happen - will have a 
more significant impact. India has already cut import duties on several food and auto products in line with 
U.S. demands. With a less than 2% contribution to global exports, Indian manufacturing needs to be 
helped, not undermined.