Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 16

Demand distress: On slowdown in the overall IIP 
Rural demand might yet pick up during the festival season 
The new financial year has gotten off to a relatively poor start when it comes to industrial 
production. Growth in the Index of Industrial Production slumped to a nine-month low of 1.2% 
in May 2025. This follows an eight-month low of 2.6% in April. Taken together, this puts the 
average growth in the index so far in 2025-26 at just 1.9%, down from the 5.7% average in 
2024-25. A major reason behind the dip in May's industrial performance was due to the 
electricity sector, which contracted 5.8%, its worst performance since June 2020, nearly five years ago. 
This poor performance in electricity generation can be put down to an unusually cool May, but it could 
also point towards lower offtake for industrial purposes. The fact also remains that the slowdown in the 
overall IIP has been broad-based - several key sectors have either contracted or slowed sharply. The 
manufacturing sector slowed to a growth of 2.6% in May, down from 5.1% in May last year. A deeper 
look shows that this slowdown was driven by contractions in the manufacture of textiles, leather 
products, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, electronics, and furniture. While some of these are core sectors, 
most are consumer-facing, implying that demand in the economy is not picking up, and may even be 
slackening further. This is backed by the fact that the consumer durables and nondurables sectors 
simultaneously contracted for the first time since November 2023. 
A sub-sector analysis of this data further reinforces the takeaway that demand is weak. Within 
consumer durables, the IIP data showed significant contractions in the production of footwear, books, 
plastic furniture, shaving razors, stainless steel utensils, computers, phones, air-conditioners and 
coolers. These are all items of discretionary spending, not strictly essential, which implies that people 
are holding off on their purchases. Even among consumer non-durables, the items that have seen 
contractions - such as meat, honey, fruit juice, jams, sugar and bottled water - are those that are 
eschewed the quickest during lean periods. The situation does not seem to have improved much in 
June either. The private sector manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index report, released on Tuesday, 
shows that while demand for intermediate goods is doing well, the same cannot be said for either 
capital or consumer goods. In recent interviews, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman has expressed 
confidence that urban demand is recovering and that Budget 2025's tax breaks will boost demand by the 
time the festival season rolls around. The progress of the monsoon so far indicates that rural demand 
may indeed pick up by then, but urban demand remains a worry. With trade remaining subdued and 
uncertain, domestic demand weakness does not augur well for the economy in 2025-26. 
T


Away from the edge: On waste disposal from the 1984 Bhopal plant accident 
The incineration of toxic waste from the Bhopal tragedy took time and effort 
The Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board has confirmed that officials had incinerated 337 
tonnes of toxic waste moved to a private waste treatment facility in Pithampur from the 
defunct Union Carbide facility in Bhopal. The event closes a single, but important, chapter in 
the sordid history of the 1984 Bhopal disaster, the state response to which pushed the city 
and its people to the edge. The successful incineration is illustrative in that it demanded 
interventions from the Madhya Pradesh High Court, the Supreme Court of India, and the Union 
Environment Ministry, among other stakeholders, over more than a decade. In the end, the State 
government was able to arrange for the waste to be safely disposed of - including an outreach exercise 
to assuage public anxiety over the emissions - within six months at a cost of ₹126 crore. Evidently the 
means have always existed; the political initiative to effect them has been wanting. This is an important 
detail: waste, once it has entered the environment, has a tendency to be converted to different forms; it 
seldom goes away. The toxic waste incinerated thus far has yielded more than 800 tonnes of ash and 
residue that officials will have to landfill in a scientific manner. Like solid waste landfills around the 
country, this new facility will require regular upkeep, monitoring, and funds of its own. The site of the 
Union Carbide plant also retains several more tonnes of contaminated soil and other hazardous 
artefacts, plus contaminated subsurface resources in the area. 
Crucially, much of the impetus for positive change in the matter, including waste removal, has come 
from victims' families, survivors, and activists rather than from the state. Survivors' groups have filed 
petitions arguing that deaths and injuries continue to be undercounted and that they are owed inflation-
adjusted damages. Since the Supreme Court closed the door on the curative route, also in dispute is 
whether a new valuation of losses can be forced on The Dow Chemical Company, notwithstanding the 
fact that it remains a proclaimed offender. Long-term surveillance has been patchy, with activists and 
survivors alleging that the advisory committee appointed by the top court has met only sporadically 
and that local hospitals continue to suffer a shortage of specialist medical workers to attend to survivors. 
In the final analysis, Dow must account for all remediation activities. Both the State and the Centre must 
close pending settlement claims and attend on a self-motivated basis to the survivors' well-being, if 
required with the assistance of a new statutory body to unify health, relief, and remediation goals. 
Ultimately, the families must be able to move on. 
T