Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 48

Humour and perversity: On regulatory measures to prevent vulgarity 
With enough laws to deal with obscenity, new regulations may be superfluous 
In suggesting that the Government should come with regulatory measures to prevent vulgarity or 
perversity in the name of humour being aired, the Supreme Court has expanded the scope of 
petitions by YouTubers caught in a criminal case over alleged obscenity in a digital programme. The 
Court has sounded the right note by calling for a discussion among stakeholders on regulations that 
would not impinge on the freedom of speech and expression and will be within the framework of 
"reasonable restrictions" permitted in the Constitution. However, such regulations may be 
superfluous, as existing laws provide for dealing with possible obscenity or vulgarity in electronic and 
digital content. That those associated with the controversial programme, 'India's Got Latent', are facing 
FIRs and have sought protection from arrests show that the present regulations may be sufficient. Under 
the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS), display of content in electronic form shall be deemed to be obscene, 
"if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest", and is a punishable offence. Similar penal 
provisions are available in the IT Act. The Programme Code under the Cable Television Network Rules 
prohibits programmes that offend decency, among other things. The Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 provide for age-based 
classification and a three-tier system of grievance redress, under which users could approach the 
platform, a self-regulatory body and a government inter-departmental committee. 
The debate between 'clean' and 'dirty' humour is age-old, but the distinction is well-understood. It is only 
in the context of public outrage over specific instances of obscenity or vulgarity that voices are raised 
about the need to maintain decency and morality. In this case, the folly of the participants in making 
sexually perverse comments is ________by the zeal of the complainants and the police, mainly because 
of the content being leaked outside a paying audience. The participants may have thus rendered 
themselves vulnerable to prosecution, but a mature society should consider whether anyone should go 
to prison for such a verbal offence. The tendency to get the police to file FIRs wherever someone 
complains is also to be deprecated. The Internet's universal reach should not become an excuse to 
confer universal jurisdiction. This often takes the case to the Court, as those named in such FIRs want 
multiple cases to be clubbed, leading to attention and a widening of the debate. An extreme case such 
as this does evoke extreme reactions, but law enforcement and legal institutions should not be 
overzealous in their response.


Against domination: On the U.S. attitude towards space programmes 
The U.S. is seeking to dictate the terms of engagement in space 
ust as Firefly Aerospace became the first private entity to soft-land a robotic lander on the moon on 
March 2, NASA acting administrator Janet Petro said "the way that we keep America first is by 
dominating in all the domains of space. And the domain ... we're going to capture … is going to 
be on the surface of the moon, and around the moon". The comment was objectionable in its 
essence, but also carries a lesson for the rest of the spacefaring world. The U.S. space 
programme remains the wealthiest and most farsighted in modern history. But like U.S. President 
Donald Trump, she seems to have lost sight of the difference between leadership and domination. Just 
as the conduct of Mr. Trump and the U.S. Vice-President at the White House meeting with the Ukraine 
President clarified the U.S.'s self-serving priorities, so too does Ms. Petro's comment reveal a nakedly 
aggressive streak in American policy - in this case, what the U.S. sees as its rightful place in 
humankind's aspirations about space. 
The moon and cislunar space, and the material and intellectual resources required to access them, are 
part of the Great Commons and they are already suffering the effects of a growing tide of protectionism 
worldwide, exacerbated by gaps between the evolution of law and the pace of innovation. Regulatory 
clarity is emerging very slowly and is often stunted. The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
recently said that it cannot be held responsible for the fragments of a SpaceX rocket that fell over Poland 
because the FAA lost oversight once SpaceX had lost control of it. Given the bent of the FAA's and Ms. 
Petro's statements, there is no reason these commons will escape the U.S.'s reckless visions of 
domination without proactive decision-making. In the absence of the ability to defy its government's 
orders, NASA's position risks endangering international cooperation - an enviable edifice assembled 
over decades in the face of an expensive, perilous, time-consuming affair - in space flight, often with 
NASA input. Irrespective of Ms. Petro's tenure at NASA, her words indicate that the helmsperson is not 
beyond being expected to further Mr. Trump's inflammatory rhetoric, if not agenda, in space and as 
well as on the ground. The cooperation must resist this. Given the Trump administration's attitudes 
towards other cooperative efforts, such as the fight against climate change, which demand 
internationalism over provincialism, it is imperative that national and supranational space bodies, 
including the Indian Space Research Organisation, come together to cultivate mechanisms to resist 
unilateral action in space, if not prevent it altogether.