Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 102

Stepping stone: On Shubhanshu Shukla, NASA-Axiom-ISRO tie-up 
The NASA-Axiom-ISRO tie-up is an admirable outcome 
 crew of four astronauts including India's Shubhanshu Shukla completed their roughly two-
week mission to the International Space Station on July 15. Mr. Shukla's trip was presumed 
to have been an intensive rehearsal ahead of his flight as part of India's first batch of 
astronauts for ISRO's 'Gaganyaan' mission, currently expected in 2027. The presumption 
is because the goals of Mr. Shukla's trip, which ISRO arranged for by paying north of ₹500 
crore to Axiom Space, have not been officially communicated by Indian authorities. Fortunately, 
clarifications from Axiom and NASA have since cast more light on its purpose. While ISRO and the 
Department of Space are still expected to proactively disseminate what they know about their activities 
under Gaganyaan, not least because of the mission's ₹20,000 crore price tag, Mr. Shukla's trip ought to 
strengthen ISRO's preparations. Human spaceflight is a highly involved endeavour: once in space, the 
crew is on its own and the resources to respond to a variety of situations are limited. According to a 
statement ISRO published after the mission launched on June 25, Mr. Shukla and Prasanth Nair - 
who is also part of Gaganyaan's first cohort of astronauts and was part of the Axiom mission's backup 
crew - were familiarized with "advanced spacecraft systems, emergency protocols, scientific payload 
operations, microgravity adaptation, space medicine, and survival traits". As the mission pilot, per 
Axiom, Mr. Shukla was also coached on docking and undocking, manual operations, atmospheric 
reentry, and anomaly management. Onboard the space station, Mr. Shukla was exposed to operations 
in the Japanese and European modules, for which he and Mr. Nair were trained in Japan and Germany. 
ISRO Chairman V. Narayanan has also said that the Axiom mission cost less than what ISRO might 
have had to invest if it had to train Mr. Shukla on its own. In all, the NASA-Axiom-ISRO tie-up emerges 
as an admirable outcome, even as space agencies continue to closely guard space technologies for their 
strategic value. 
Concerns that the limitations imposed by the U.S.'s International Traffic in Arms Regulations would 
prevent the duo from learning much may also be laid to rest. Instead, they may be replaced by concerns 
about ISRO's piecemeal communication. Astronauts cut inspirational figures and appeal to all ages. As 
India prepares for its first human spaceflight mission, there can be no better way to build excitement than 
by facilitating access to India's astronauts. The lack of initiative is hard to rationalize, although it is still 
not too late. ISRO as well as India's soft power platform will make copious gains by expanding outreach 
and easing public access to the spacefarers. 
A


Pain remains: On inflation 
Fall in food prices is only one part of the inflation story 
The continued fall in inflation to a 77-month low of 2.1% in June 2025 should serve as a 
significant source of relief for policymakers. The general public, however, would not be too 
thrilled. There is some good news for them, but also a significant dose of pain. Food inflation, 
for example, saw a significant easing, although that too is a seasonal effect rather than a 
structural one. Food and beverage prices contracted 0.2% in June 2025 on a high base of 
8.4% in June last year. Key items such as vegetables, pulses, spices and meat saw prices falling in 
June compared to their levels last year. But food is not all that people spend their money on. The data 
reveal that there were several items and services of common consumption that saw inflation quickening 
in June. The education and stationery segment saw inflation quicken to 4.4% in June, the highest in 15 
months. This was driven by a jump in the prices of school, college, and private tuition. Inflation in the 
health-care category, too, was at a 15-month high in June. Compounding this, the personal care 
segment saw inflation jumping to a blistering 14.8% in June, the eighth month of double-digit inflation in 
the last nine months. Products such as soap, toothpaste, shampoo and sanitary napkins - items of 
daily or regular use and by no stretch luxuries - have become more expensive. So, overall, food is 
cheaper, but nearly everything else is more expensive. 
This leads to an important policy question, one that has been asked several times before: is the headline 
inflation data adequately capturing the price rise the average Indian faces? The food basket itself carries 
a 46% weight in the overall Consumer Price Index (CPI), meaning that any change in this category has 
an inordinate impact on the headline number. The recent Household Consumption Expenditure Surveys 
show that food comprises a much smaller share of about 30% in the expenditure of households. Bringing 
the CPI weight of food down to align with this will allow the overall CPI to be more representative. To be 
fair, that process is on, with the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation in the process of 
updating the CPI. The CPI base year - so far set as 2011-12 - is being updated to a more recent time 
period, and the weights of the different categories are also being revised. This update cannot happen 
fast enough, as even monetary policy is currently dependent on this outdated and unrepresentative 
measure. In the meantime, it is important not to get swayed by the fall in the headline number itself. The 
felt experience of the average Indian is described in the details, and it is still a painful one. 
T