Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 43

Inconclusive chapter: On Tamil Nadu and NEET 
Tamil Nadu should help prepare its students for clearing NEET 
ith President Droupadi Murmu withholding assent for the Tamil Nadu Admission to 
Undergraduate Medical Degree Courses Bill 2021, the State is bracing for another 
battle against National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (NEET)-based admissions. State 
Chief Minister M.K. Stalin has convened a meeting of legislature party leaders on 
April 9 to strategize the next move. With the admission season approaching, the 
development is bound to cause uncertainty and make medical aspirants anxious. Exemption from NEET 
now remains an inconclusive chapter in the State's decade-old policy discourse. No other State effort to 
legislate against a central mandate has been so protracted and unpredictable. In September 2017, two 
anti-NEET Bills met with a similar fate in Rashtrapati Bhavan. Four years later, the ruling DMK - having 
made NEET exemption a central electoral promise - passed the Bill in the Assembly based on the 
recommendations of the Justice A.K. Rajan Committee. Instead of forwarding it for presidential assent, 
Governor R.N. Ravi returned it to the House after five months. In a historic first, the Assembly 
unanimously re-adopted the Bill and sent it back to him; the Governor subsequently forwarded it to the 
President. Last week, Mr. Stalin informed the Assembly that assent had been denied, without specifying 
when Rashtrapati Bhavan had communicated the decision. 
This delay in the matter attaining finality is concerning as students have been left facing a state of 
perpetual uncertainty. The State remains firm in its policy of conducting admission for government quota 
medical seats based on the Class 12 Board examination scores. Early on, the Ministry of Home Affairs 
had asked "whether the Bill endangered the sovereignty, unity and integrity of the nation" to which the 
AYUSH Ministry responded affirmatively. The framers of the Constitution had incorporated Article 254 (2) 
empowering the President to grant assent to Bills repugnant to central laws on Concurrent List matters. 
NEET has been consistently upheld by the Supreme Court of India too. The President is under no 
obligation to give assent, although the Bill reflects the collective will of Tamil Nadu's legislature: it was 
passed unanimously. True, NEET is neither foolproof nor an absolute measure of academic competency, 
but Tamil Nadu's legal options are limited. The judiciary is unlikely to settle the issue with any urgency. 
The State must prepare for a legal struggle, and in the interim, coach students to face NEET with 
confidence. 
W


A regional revival: On the BIMSTEC summit 
BIMSTEC summit provided a platform for bilateral meetings 
ast week's Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation 
(BIMSTEC) summit - the sixth - which brought the leaders of seven neighbouring countries to 
Bangkok at a time of global turbulence, was an opportunity to reignite the regional grouping 
after years of stasis. Originally cast as a "bridging" mechanism between South Asia's SAARC 
and South East Asia's ASEAN countries, the grouping has languished due to a lack of purpose 
or due to political underpinnings. After the collapse of India-Pakistan ties, post-2014, SAARC has made 
little movement, whereas the micro-grouping of Bangladesh-Bhutan-India-Nepal ran aground after the 
Bhutanese Parliament rejected the Motor Vehicles Agreement between them, as a result of which New 
Delhi has invested in BIMSTEC. While the objective of having a summit every two years was derailed by 
the COVID-19 pandemic, what is important is that the summit was held in spite of a possible derailment 
after the earthquake in Myanmar and Thailand. But the summit proved useful, given the number of 
agreements and areas of cooperation. These include a BIMSTEC chamber of commerce and work on 
the India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway that will connect India's North-East region, billed a 
BIMSTEC "hub", all the way to the Pacific ocean. The BIMSTEC region is prone to natural disasters and 
building a joint mechanism for disaster management is critical. Negotiating a free trade agreement (FTA) 
and Customs agreements are among other plans outlined in a 'Vision 2030' document that was adopted. 
Apart from the multilateral outcomes, the summit provided the leaders a rare opportunity for bilateral 
meetings. Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Bangladesh Chief Adviser Muhammad Yunus put aside 
months of acrimony and aired their grievances over the treatment of minorities, border killings and former 
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina's stay in India. Mr. Modi's advice that "rhetoric" must be avoided between 
neighbours is important, but must be followed in Dhaka and Delhi. Mr. Modi's meeting with Nepal leader 
K.P. Sharma Oli came after months of tensions over India's refusal to issue Mr. Oli an invite, and it is 
hoped that these exchanges will lead to an early visit and the resolution of issues. The inclusion of 
Myanmar's Prime Minister General Min Aung Hlaing was a special gesture by the BIMSTEC grouping, 
and it is hoped that Mr. Modi's counsel to Gen. Min and Mr. Yunus on restoring democratic processes in 
Myanmar and Bangladesh will be heeded. While the summit was productive, many of its initiatives are 
replicas of agreements once adopted by SAARC, and it is important that member-states focus on the 
group's cohesion and sustainability so that BIMSTEC is not allowed to atrophy the same way as SAARC 
did.