Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 82

War and talks: On Russia and Ukraine 
Both Russia and Ukraine are looking for security guarantees 
The Russia-Ukraine war has entered a new phase, marked by intensified military attacks and 
direct negotiations. On Sunday (June 1, 2025), on the eve of the second round of talks, 
Ukraine carried out its most daring drone attack deep inside Russia, targeting military airfields. 
According to Ukrainian intelligence officials, the drones, which were transported by trucks into 
Russia and launched remotely, resulted in "the destruction" of dozens of strategic bombers. 
While these claims have not been independently verified, Russia's Ministry of Defence confirmed that 
five of its airfields came under attack, and aircraft at two stations, one close to the Norwegian border and 
the other in Siberia, "caught fire". That Ukraine managed to carry out such an attack is a morale booster 
for its troops and a tactical setback for Russian President Vladimir Putin. Prior to Kyiv's attack, Russia 
had launched an avalanche of drones and missiles across Ukraine, significantly straining the country's 
air defences. It included a missile strike at a military training base on Sunday, killing at least 12 Ukrainian 
soldiers. But a silver lining amid the intensifying military exchanges was that Russia and Ukraine went 
ahead with the planned direct talks in Istanbul on Monday. In the hour-long meeting, negotiators agreed 
to a prisoner exchange deal, and scheduled a third round of talks later in June. 
Forty months into the war, the signs of exhaustion are evident on both sides. Ukraine, faced with 
battlefield challenges, is trying to offset its vulnerabilities by staging innovative drone attacks to make the 
Kremlin feel the pain of the war. Kyiv has not had any major territorial victory in its lost territories since 
the Kherson offensive of late 2022. Over the past year, Ukraine has lost nearly 5,000 sq. km of its 
territory to the Russians. Russia has recaptured the land Ukraine had seized in Kursk. Russia's spring 
offensive is now gaining momentum, with territorial advances in the Sumy region, while Ukraine is 
grappling with weakened air defences, an acute manpower crisis and uncertainty about continued U.S. 
support under President Donald Trump. Russia has found it increasingly difficult to prevent Ukraine's 
drone attacks targeting its energy infrastructure, the Black Sea fleet and now airfields hosting strategic 
bombers. If Russia has battlefield momentum, Ukraine stays defiant. If the war continues to drag on, the 
toll on both sides will only deepen. So far, efforts by Mr. Trump to broker peace have yielded little 
progress. But he should not give up. Russia has long-standing grievances and future security concerns 
that must be addressed. Ukraine wants credible security guarantees that shield it from future attacks. 
The U.S. has a crucial role to play in narrowing these differences and working toward a durable 
ceasefire.


Growing pains: On economic performance, Viksit Bharat 
India needs to grow faster to transition as a developed economy 
hedataon India's economic performance in 2024-25, released on Friday, havesomething for 
everybody. Thosewith an optimistic outlook canrejoice at the seemingly robust growth in the 
fourth quarter. Pessimists can despair over the four-year low annual growth figure. The 
realist's assessment, however, is that there is cause for some restrained celebration, and 
more than a healthy dose of disappointment. The Q4 growth of 7.4% was considerably higher 
than what was expected for the quarter, and the fastest seen in an otherwise dismal financial year. The 
main drivers were the construction sector returning to double-digit growth, and the agriculture sector 
posting a strong showing. These are also two major employment drivers. Services, too, continued their 
steady and strong growth. The manufacturing sector, on the other hand, grew at just 4.8%, down from 
11.3% in Q4 of the previous year. There is a reality check hiding in the aggregate numbers, as well. The 
GDP growth rate of 7.4% was achieved in large part due to a 12.7% growth in net taxes. This bump in 
tax collections provided a statistical boost without which growthin actual economic activity wouldhave 
come in at around 6.8%. The much-hyped 'Maha Kumbh effect' on consumption expenditure also does 
not seem to have materialised. Growthin Private Final Consumption Expenditure in Q4 - the Kumbh 
quarter - camein at 6%, the slowest in five quarters. Capital formation, however, grew a robust 9.4% as 
the government finally sped up its sluggish capital investments. 
Government officials and Union Ministers have expressed their satisfaction at the 6.5% growth in 2024-
25, the slowest since the pandemic, saying it is still the fastest among major economies, and not bad in 
the context of a "growth-scarce" global environment. All of this is true. Yet, 'not bad' is not nearly good 
enough for India. The race is not with the rest of the world, but is an effort to keep pace with the country's 
growing requirements. The Modi government, with its sights set on a 'Viksit Bharat' by 2047, mustbe held 
to a higher standard in line with its aspirations. If, as the Economic Survey points out, Viksit Bharat by 
2047 requires "sustained economic growth of close to 8% every year for at least a decade", then India is 
decidedly moving very slowly, even if in the right direction. In his press conference, Chief Economic 
Adviser V. Anantha Nageswaran said India was entering a phase of low inflation and stable growth. 
Stability can be good, since it implies lower chances of growth slowing. Yet, it also implies growth is 
unlikely to accelerate significantly either. The government needs to consider whether this is truly a 
satisfactory situation for a transitioning economy. 
T