Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 100

Time for action: On the RBI pausing rate cuts 
The Reserve Bank of India did well to pause rate cuts amid the uncertainties 
The Reserve Bank of India's (RBI) Monetary Policy Committee was sensible to pause its rate 
cuts, as announced on Wednesday (August 6, 2025). RBI Governor Sanjay Malhotra rightly 
pointed out that the uncertainties surrounding tariffs are still evolving, and that the 100 bps of 
rate cuts implemented since February 2025 are still percolating through the system. Mr. 
Malhotra's statement was made before U.S. President Donald Trump approved an additional 
25% tariff on imports from India, over and above the existing 25% reciprocal tariffs. However, 
This assessment that the matter is far from over was nevertheless accurate. India is still in the 
process of negotiating a Bilateral Trade Agreement with the U.S., and the final tariffs are far from 
decided. In the meantime, Mr. Trump has already indicated that similar additional tariffs - "penalties" for 
buying oil from Russia - may be imposed on other countries as well, which will impact India's 
comparative advantage. Leaving room for another rate cut later in the year when things might be clearer, 
thus, was the sensible thing to do. The other broad reason why the pause makes sense is that it allows 
the RBI to see whether such monetary measures are working. A 100 bps cumulative cut in rates over 
the last six months is significant, and the banking system needs time to pass that on to borrowers. 
The Governor also pointed out that there is ample liquidity in the system, which means the banks have 
the money to lend. The question, however, is whether there is enough growth-related borrowing 
happening. RBI data show that, as of end-June, loans to purchase consumer durables had contracted 
about 3% compared to the previous year. Growth in housing loans slowed sharply to 9.6% from 36% a 
year earlier, while vehicle loans too slowed by five percentage points over the last year. In line with this 
subdued demand outlook, companies too seem to be slowing their borrowing. Loans to industry grew 
5.5% in June 2025, down from 8.1% in June last year. Simply reducing rates, therefore, is not enough 
and that is something the Governor alluded to when he said stronger policy frameworks "across 
domains, and not just limited to monetary policy", would be pivotal in achieving India's growth potential. 
The government has to intervene in a more focused manner than just increasing capital expenditure 
across the board. A lot can be done through tax. The Goods and Services Tax rate rationalization, that 
was promised several times, is long overdue. A reduction in fuel prices in line with lower oil prices, too, 
will lift consumer sentiment. The RBI can, for the moment, afford to wait things out. The government 
does not have this luxury.


Dangerous turn: On Trump and the Ukraine war 
Trump must stay the course on diplomacy to end the Ukraine war 
resident Donald Trump's announcement that he has ordered "two nuclear submarines to be 
positioned in appropriate regions", in response to the "provocative statements" by former 
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev, marks a dangerous turn in the U.S.-Russia relationship 
which the Republican leader had pledged to repair in the run-up to his election late last year. 
Mr. Medvedev, now the Deputy Chairman of Russia's Security Council, had said that Mr. 
Trump's threats of imposing tariffs on Russia were "a step towards war". Mr. Trump did not specify 
whether he has moved submarines capable of launching intercontinental ballistic missiles with nuclear 
warheads, or nuclear-powered boats equipped with conventional weapons. In recent weeks, Mr. Trump 
has expressed growing frustration with his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin over the Ukraine war. 
Initially, he gave Mr. Putin a 50-day deadline to end the war or face American tariffs. On July 29, this was 
shortened to 10 to 12 days. Mr. Trump has also threatened secondary "penalty" tariffs on countries that 
trade with Russia such as India and China. 
Mr. Trump's frustration is understandable. He pressured Ukraine into accepting a ceasefire proposal. His 
Defence Secretary publicly stated that Ukraine would not be taken into NATO. Yet, the most that he 
managed to extract from Mr. Putin was a limited truce in the Black Sea and a temporary pause in attacks 
on Ukrainian infrastructure. At the heart of the impasse are the divergent views in western capitals and 
Moscow on how to end the war. While western leaders insist on an immediate ceasefire, Moscow 
believes that this should be part of a comprehensive peace agreement addressing its core security 
concerns, including NATO's eastward expansion.  Russia also finds little incentive to de-escalate at a 
time when its troops have strategic momentum. Ukraine has carried out deadly drone attacks on several 
Russian cities, but on the battlefield, is struggling to hold the line. Besides, Mr. Trump's decision to bomb 
Iran on behalf of Israel, at a time when Tehran was technically in talks with the U.S., appears to have 
hardened Russia's position. Nevertheless, diplomatic setbacks are not an excuse for nuclear sabre-
rattling. The last thing the world wants today is a direct conflict between the U.S. and Russia. Instead of 
escalating the crisis, Mr. Trump must reflect on why America's current approach - combining sanctions 
against Russia with military support for Ukraine - has failed to deter Mr. Putin. His initial turn towards 
diplomacy was a step in the right direction. He must stay the course and narrow the gap between the 
western and Russian positions on ending the war. 
P