Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 44

South Asia will change with global economy's transition 
pril 2025 has been an absolute whirlwind. Tariffs have been announced and tariffs have 
been suspended. So with retaliations. Markets have risen at their fastest in modern times 
and fallen sharply in the same day. The shock to the global system as a result of all this is 
unlikely to fade away soon. It has already left too many scars. When the world changes, 
what will be next? For South Asia, which has not really been the focus just yet, what will 
the future be? Since at least the early 1940s, the world has been living under a dollar-based system. 
Since the 1970s, this dollar-based system has additionally taken on the form of a U.S.-deficit system. As 
the consumer of the first and last resort, it has been the U.S. household that has been buying the world's 
products, in many cases by borrowing from the world itself. As different countries rose and fell in their 
role as the factories of the world, money flowed across these different players. If any country or region 
was lucky enough to be the intermediate between these flows, it benefited. For quite a while, this 
became East Asia and the varied countries in the region. From the mid-2000s, this became a more 
singular story. China emerged as the clear and increasingly singular counterparty to the U.S. deficit. It 
was the rise of China's factories that led to cheaper goods across the world, to money that flowed 
between the U.S. and China through the rest of the world, and to a growth boom across the developing 
world. For the U.S., this singular counterparty was one of stability. No longer did shifts in capital create 
crises in the same way. The deficit ran strong and the U.S. even started growing faster itself. Today, this 
world looks like it's behind us. Direct trade between the U.S. and China is effectively embargoed at tariff 
rates north of 100%. Trade across the rest of the world is also higher. Regardless of the specifics of 
where the tariffs end up, at this point it looks increasingly clear the world will find it hard to credibly 
depend on the U.S. as the consumer of the first and last resort for too long. The world of trade looks like 
it's changing. Where will it go from here? 
In the previous global economic order of U.S. deficits and East Asian surpluses, South Asia played a 
relatively clear role. South Asians were, on the whole, net importers - more of a household than a 
factory. In that role, they borrowed from the capital stockpiles of the world - directly from East Asia in 
some cases, and indirectly through other beneficiaries. This borrowed capital then helped drive strong 
growth in the region. On a smaller scale, South Asia also served as an intermediary of trade. On the 
whole, the region has a trade deficit with East Asia and a trade surplus with the U.S. Small amounts of 
trade (small compared with the size of South Asia's economy) then flowed from East Asia, value-added 
in South Asia, and consumed in the U.S. This was not by any means the most important part of the 
South Asian economy - household consumption was.  
A


Law of the land: on the judiciary and waqf amendments 
All aspects of the waqf amendments need a serious study 
The Supreme Court of India last week turned the spotlight on some controversial provisions of 
the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025 passed by Parliament recently. The amendments expand 
government control over waqf properties at the cost of the autonomy of the Muslim community 
to manage them. On April 17, the Court recorded the Centre's assurance that waqf properties, 
including "waqf by user", will not be de-notified and appointments will not be made to the 
Central Waqf Council and State Waqf Boards, based on provisions of the new law till May 5, the next 
hearing. The Centre thus preempted a judicial order which appeared possible during the hearing. The 
Court had raised concerns about the provisions in the new law which discontinued the category of waqf 
by user, made non-Muslims eligible for appointment in the council/waqf boards, and gave the state 
unilateral power to take over the control of waqf properties in the event of a dispute, pending its final 
resolution. The new law can potentially bring into dispute the legal status of many Muslim sites which 
came into existence before modern land registration laws were in place. Lawyers for the petitioners who 
are challenging the constitutionality of the new law, pointed out that as much as half of all waqf 
properties could be so by long usage and may lack documentation. 
There are around 100 petitions before the Court on the issue. Questions that it will have to settle include 
whether the provision that a waqf can be made only by persons who have demonstrably practised Islam 
for at least five years violates the right to freedom of religion; whether changes in the definition of waqf to 
exclude "waqf by user" are discriminatory and whether the proposed inclusion of non-Muslim members to 
the council/waqf boards violates Article 26. Article 26, among other things, guarantees a religious group 
the right to "establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes" and "to manage its 
own affairs in matters of religion." True, some sections of these amendments promote inclusivity and 
wider representation of different sects of the Muslim community, and ensure transparency and 
accountability in the management of waqf properties. However, there are concerns about their impact 
and distortion of the religious nature of the waqfs. Though there were prolonged consultations and a long 
parliamentary debate before the law was passed, pointedly missing was any effort to take the Muslim 
community into confidence on a matter that affects it. The Court is now seized of these questions which 
will have ramifications for the character of India as a secular, pluralist country. 
T