Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 26

An exit of bluster: On the U.S. and the climate change fight 
The rest of the world must reassess the U.S.'s role in fighting climate change 
resident Donald Trump has fired his howitzers at multilateralism by signing into decree the 
United States' withdrawal from the 2015 Paris Agreement. This sets records that are in a 
class of their own. The U.S. is the only country to have withdrawn thrice from a climate 
agreement - beginning with George W. Bush's withdrawal, in 2001, from the Kyoto Protocol. 
Mr. Trump, of course, sets a new low by being the only President to withdraw from a climate 
agreement twice. In the run-up to the decree, there is a pall of gloom in the climate world over 
what the U.S.'s latest exit might mean, particularly when the globe has finished its first full 
calendar year above the 1.5° Celsius mark. 
The U.S. is the second largest emitter of greenhouse gases. By virtue of being the most powerful 
economy, it has arrogated to itself the mantle of 'global leadership' in addressing climate change. But 
now that the leader has had the spottiest track record of keeping to the terms of a significant agreement 
- one, whose rule book the U.S. played a major role in compiling - perhaps it is time for the rest of the 
world to reassess America's role in addressing climate change. Under both Republican and Democratic 
governments, U.S. domestic policy on greenhouse gas emissions has been subservient to business 
interests. Oil and gas production increased under the Biden administration. The U.S. remains the world's 
largest crude oil producer, achieving record production in 2023. The country is also the world's largest 
producer of gas and, in 2022, became the world's largest exporter for liquified natural gas (LNG). Mr. 
Trump has only committed to add on to this already substantial base. The U.S. is critically short of 
achieving its target of greenhouse gas emissions. As of 2022, the U.S. has achieved only about one-third 
of its 2030 emissions reduction target. In the last weeks of his Presidency, Mr. Biden increased the 
U.S.'s emission-reduction commitments to 61%-66% of 2005 levels by 2035. This too, calculations 
suggest, will be insufficient to meet a 1.5° C target. Private capital propping up renewable energy has 
grown exponentially since Mr. Bush, and is now too substantial for Mr. Trump and his financial backers 
to ignore. While it will take a year for the exit to be formalized, it is likely that the U.S.'s behind-the-
scenes engagement - especially at the next climate meet (COP 30) in Brazil in November 2025 - will 
continue. The politics of Mr. Trump suggests that he is not averse to 
running with the hare and hunting with the hounds.


Inflation matrix: On the numbers and trends 
December's price rise numbers do not ring in enough relief 
In the final inflation print before the Union Budget for 2025-26 is presented, followed by the first 
review of the monetary policy led by the new Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in early 
February, the price rise faced by Indian consumers eased to 5.22% in December. Although a four-
month low, this still marked only a mild decline from November's 5.5% uptick in the Consumer 
Price Index (CPI), and was largely driven by a sequential easing in food prices. Food inflation 
moderated from over 9% in the previous month to 8.4% last month, and though inflation in 
vegetables cooled from 29.3% to 26.6%, it still remained generally high. Households still forked out 
a lot more for their meals than they did a year ago - it must be recalled that overall inflation was 5.7% 
and food price rise, over 9.5% in December 2023. While prices of some food items, including vegetables, 
are seen cooling further this month, those of a few critical ingredients have started spiking, including of 
edible oils, that rose at a 33-month high pace of 14.6% in December. Eggs, meat and fruits also saw 
inflation accelerating last month along with the relatively humble potato (up 68.2%). Moreover, inflation 
in wholesale prices has gained pace, signaling that there is room for higher costs to be passed on to 
consumers for food items as well as manufactured products. 
The government and industry want the RBI to cut interest rates to reinvigorate consumption and fading 
growth impulses by looking through 'volatile' food inflation. But even industry captains admit that just 
keeping food prices out of the interest rates and growth-inflation balancing act will not suffice. Moreover, 
even if the weightage for food in the CPI is reduced in line with the recent household consumption 
spending survey results, food price trends have a material impact on the spending propensity of 
households and their inflation expectations. Inflation may yet average 4.5% through January to March, 
as the RBI expects, but the central bank that has committed to await a durable alignment to its 4% goal 
before slashing rates, has a difficult call to make in February. Tangible measures, if any, to ease price 
pressures in the Budget, along with some visibility on the Centre's fiscal glide path, could help tip the 
scales for a rate cut cycle to begin soon, if not next month. There are a few new imponderables that have 
compounded the trade-off matrix for policymakers in North Block as well as Mint Street - the swift 
unravelling of the rupee vis-à-vis the dollar in recent weeks which raises the risk of importing inflation, 
among other collateral effects, especially as global oil prices have resurged to multi-month highs. A very 
nuanced approach is imperative to avoid fresh missteps.