Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 78

Trade diplomacy: on India-Bangladesh trade-related tensions 
Trade restrictions against Bangladesh will not have much coercive value 
In an escalation of bilateral trade-related tensions, India recently announced restrictions on 
readymade garments and other specified commodities from Bangladesh. The Directorate General 
of Foreign Trade's announcement targeting Bangladesh's vital apparel sector sent an unmistakable 
signal that deteriorating political relations have now spilled over into economic ties. By specifically 
denying Bangladeshi goods access to India's northeast market, New Delhi has delivered a pointed 
message to Mohammed Yunus, Bangladesh's interim leader, who during his visit to China in March 2025 
had invited Chinese access to India's northeast through Bangladesh, describing the northeast as 
landlocked. While India's discomfiture about Bangladesh-China discussions regarding India's northeast 
is understandable, this trade restriction may hurt Bangladeshi businesses, largely dependent on garment 
export, but will do little to aid New Delhi's strategic interests. Bangladesh's recent political turmoil stems 
from protests against its former elected government, and the interim leadership - struggling with 
resistant bureaucracy and ongoing instability - has blamed New Delhi due to its perceived close ties 
with the previous administration led by Sheikh Hasina. The Yunus-led administration's warming up to 
Pakistan, and its ban on the Awami League - actions that go against its promises to the international 
community - have worsened relations. The imperative for New Delhi must be to come up with a deft 
outreach to other political parties in Bangladesh as they prepare for elections. While Mr. Yunus had 
announced that elections will be held later this year, there is still no clarity on the date. 
New Delhi must, in consonance with the rest of the international community, advise the regime to 
conduct elections quickly. A political gesture of this nature while engaging with multiple stakeholders in 
Bangladesh's polity is more appropriate than using restrictive moves related to trade, as this would only 
heighten the anti-India sentiment being fanned by some elements in Bangladesh after the Awami League 
government's exit. Such radical elements, many of whom have little investment in the restoration of 
democratic processes, could also create fresh law and order problems that could lead to security issues 
in the northeast. India should carefully lay out its response keeping in mind that while it has to 
communicate its displeasure to the Yunus government, it also has to maintain working relations with this 
administration till a popularly elected government takes charge in Dhaka. 
I


Permanent damage: On the Trump administration and Harvard 
Trump administration's attack on Harvard will have long-term impact 
ivic life in the United States stands on multiple, strong and independent institutions in 
different fields. These institutions, whether constitutionality mandated or not, have a 
continuity, life and standing of their own, beyond particular individuals. They enable diversity 
and pluralism, and provide protection against arbitrary decisions by those in power. 
Ironically enough, U.S. President Donald Trump is intent on damaging its oldest and 
wealthiest educational institution - Harvard. After harassing the institution with 
investigations, orders to turn over records, and freezing funds and grants running to hundreds 
of millions of dollars, the U.S. government has said that Harvard cannot enroll foreign 
students in 2025-26. Some 6,800 international students, including more than 750 from India, 
constitute more than 27% of its current student strength. They will have to transfer to other 
institutions within the U.S. or leave, as per the government, which does not want any new international 
student there in 2025-26 either. The U.S. government has said that the student visa programme is a 
privilege that it has granted and Harvard "relies heavily" on foreign students to "build and maintain their 
substantial endowment", which is said to run to over $55 billion. And it sees foreign student visas and 
tax-exempt status as weapons in its arsenal against Harvard. 
Across the world, the authoritarian's playbook for pluralistic societies is to identify an enemy against 
whom a campaign is unleashed based on real and imagined grievances. The campaign keeps the 
"enemy" in a state of disarray, even turmoil, with long-term damage and a chilling effect. Though sullied 
by unsavoury links, from the Salem witch trials to Enron, Harvard attracts some of the brightest talent 
from across the world and trains them for leadership roles in their chosen fields. It represents liberalism 
and knowledge creation that advances globalization. Mr. Trump's working- and middle-class support 
base looks at Harvard as one among elitist vehicles of globalization that have excluded them while 
promoting affirmative action for minorities, especially African-Americans. While lineage and family 
background of prospective students are a factor for Harvard, an extensive scholarship programme 
seeks to balance that. Harvard has said that it will go to court against the government's move just as it 
sued the Trump administration for freezing government funds. While the courts may well stay the ban, 
the damage has been done not just to Harvard but also to the image of American higher education and 
democratic principles. It is damage that cannot be easily remedied.