Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 37

Data and federalism: On the NITI NCAER States Economic Forum portal 
Reliable data can lead the dialogue between the Centre and the States 
This week, NITI Aayog, in partnership with the National Council of Applied Economic Research 
(NCAER), launched the NITI NCAER States Economic Forum - a portal aggregating data 
and analysis on State finances. It presents State-wise reports covering macroeconomic 
indicators including tax and non-tax revenues, as well as human development statistics such 
as school dropout rates, literacy levels, employment, and historical trends in the devolution of 
central funds. At a time when Centre-State relations are under renewed scrutiny, particularly in the 
southern States, where fiscal federalism has been a long-standing flashpoint, this portal is a timely and 
welcome move. The data is not new, drawn as it is from established sources such as the 2011 Census, 
the Periodic Labour Force Survey, and the Reserve Bank of India's State Finances Report. However, its 
comparative presentation across States brings clarity to the diverse fiscal realities of India, offering a 
structured lens through which to assess disparities and development. Concerns persist about the quality 
of economic data in India, and this portal is not immune to these, relying as it does on existing sources. 
Yet, by organising the data in a user-friendly and comparative format, it can help anchor contentious 
debates - such as those around revenue-sharing and parliamentary delimitation - in facts rather than 
sentiment. While these issues are serious, they are part of a much larger set of challenges tied to fiscal 
relations and political power-sharing between the Union and the States. 
The effective use of such data depends on ongoing engagement by States, especially through 
institutions such as the Sixteenth Finance Commission. For India's federal structure to work equitably, 
regional data must be translated into policies that ensure fair representation, resource allocation, and 
administrative responsibility. Unfortunately, discussions on federalism often get reduced to narrow and 
polarized frames such as debates around the three-language policy or calls to defer delimitation. Over-
centralization can breed discontent, while regional resistance often risks turning parochial. Navigating 
this balance requires cooperation rooted in evidence and mutual recognition of diverse State realities. 
Leaders in both New Delhi and the State capitals must engage in a spirit of transparency and trust. The 
new data platform is not a panacea but offers a credible starting point - a tool for fostering informed, 
pragmatic conversations around governance, development, and the future of Indian federalism. 
T


American retreat: On Trump's turn to protectionism 
The U.S. risks ceding its position as a global economic powerhouse 
hat United States President Donald Trump did to global trade on April 2, 2025 in 
Washington closely mirrors a disruptive precedent set by President Richard Nixon in 
1971. On August 15, Nixon stunned the world by announcing the "temporary 
suspension" of the U.S. dollar's convertibility into gold. This effectively dismantled the 
Bretton Woods framework that was worked out quite unilaterally in 1944, which led to 
the setting up of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, and provided an anchor for global 
currency stability - an avenue to address balance of payments crises, and to finance the reconstruction 
efforts of former colonial powers. Though announced as a temporary move, it became permanent and 
upended the global financial system, as nations reckoned with a new era of financial market volatility. 
Similarly, Mr. Trump's reciprocal tariffs have instantly ushered in global economic uncertainty, the full 
extent of which will be felt in the months and the years ahead. By unilaterally altering trade relationships, 
The has disrupted the very system of interconnected global commerce that the U.S. helped build in the 
post-war era. 
The international reaction has been one of shock and concern. The U.S. is the world's largest importer of 
manufactured goods, accounting for about 13% of global imports in 2023. The new tariffs will reroute 
supply chains and force countries to diversify their export strategies. In the immediate term, the cost of 
imports will rise for American consumers, leading to reduced demand. The ripple effects will be global, 
causing production slowdowns as exporters scramble to find alternative markets. Economies such as 
China, Japan, India and the European Union are likely to experience a temporary decline in economic 
growth. Yet, unlike in the Nixon era, the U.S. today holds a diminished position in global trade. In the 
1970s, it was the world's dominant trader, with an estimated 13%-15% share of global trade. China's 
presence was negligible at the time, accounting for less than 1%. Today, China commands the largest 
share of global trade, at around 14%, while the U.S. has slipped to roughly 10%. The international 
community also accepted the dollar's supremacy in the 1970s because of America's overwhelming 
economic and technological dominance. Now, although the dollar remains the preferred reserve 
currency, the centre of economic gravity has shifted. The world's leading exporters of advanced 
technologies are now China and other Asian powers, including South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan. Thus, 
Mr. Trump's turn to protectionism - an attempt to regain American economic dominance - may well 
hasten the country's retreat from its hegemonic position. 
W