Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 75

Greater share: On States and central taxes 
States deserve a bigger share of central taxes in post-GST era 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's exhortation to the Chief Ministers gathered at the 10th 
Governing Council Meeting of NITI Aayog over the weekend, in New Delhi, that the Centre 
and States should come together as "Team India" to propel the country forward, is a good 
sentiment; but, it belies reality. The Centre-States relationship right now is a one-way street, 
with the Centre resorting to the stick, and, occasionally, to the carrot method, to make the 
States comply with its wishes. The States are finding it increasingly difficult to voice their often genuine 
and serious grievances at the national level since federal bodies such as the NITI Aayog Governing 
Council or the Goods and Services Tax (GST) Council do not meet often. Meeting once a year is not 
nearly enough for the Governing Council of a body whose very first objective is to develop a "shared 
vision of national development priorities". The GST Council, too, has not met in more than five months, 
when regulations say it should meet at least once a quarter. So, when the States do get a chance to 
speak at the national level, as they did on Saturday, most have no choice but to focus on their individual 
problems or achievements rather than on a collaborative 'Team India' approach. There were, however, 
some notable deviations where Chief Ministers looked beyond their States' borders in an attempt to drive 
national growth. One was Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu's proposal for the 
creation of three sub-groups of States to focus attention on the issues of GDP growth and investments, 
leveraging India's demographic bounty, and using technology to drive governance. Sub-groups are a 
good way for the Centre to bring States on board, if it finds a body comprising all States to be too 
unwieldy. 
The most notable pan-India suggestion was probably Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M.K. Stalin's call for the 
Centre to share 50% of its tax revenue with the States, up from the current formula of 41%. This is an 
issue that certainly requires more discussion. The implicit condition behind the Centre providing States 
compensation for any losses arising out of GST for five years was that the States would use this time to 
bolster their own tax revenues. While progress on this has been patchy - with some States doing far 
better than others - it has nevertheless been significant. The States' combined own tax revenues as a 
percentage of Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew from 6.6% in 2017-18 to 7.2% in 2024-25. 
On the other hand, GST has failed to live up to its potential, with net revenues only recently surpassing 
pre-GST indirect tax levels. Since GST subsumed many of the States' levies, it seems only fair that the 
Centre seriously consider their demand for a bigger share in central taxes. 
P


Sound and fury: On the monsoon 
India needs a societal effort to factor in IMD forecasts in everyday life 
The southwest monsoon stormed into Kerala, a week ahead of its scheduled arrival on June 
1. This was not a surprise because as early as the first week of May, meteorologists had 
tipped off the country about its early arrival over the Andaman Sea - a crucial pit stop 
before its advent over Kerala. A May onset is not an exceptional occurrence - it has 
happened four times since 2014 - but additional support from a pre-cyclonic circulation in 
the Arabian Sea gave it a tremendous surge due to which several parts of Maharashtra and the Konkan 
coast saw the monsoon reach their shores earlier than anticipated. It was the first time in 35 years that 
Mumbai, which usually welcomes the monsoon around June 10, saw a May onset. Even prior to the 
onset, the India Meteorological Department (IMD), as far back as mid-April, had forecast an 'above 
normal' monsoon rainfall, or 5% more than the historical average of 87 cm. Following the monsoon's 
onset, it has retained this outlook of 'above normal' rain, and has since increased it to 6% above the 
average. 
One of the quirks of how the IMD measures monsoon rainfall is that it only counts rainfall from June 1 to 
September 30 as 'monsoon rainfall.' Thus, all the rain that has flooded Kerala, Mumbai and other cities 
since May 24 (when the monsoon landed) is accounted as 'pre-monsoon' rainfall. In its update, the IMD 
said that it anticipates June to receive 'above normal' rains. This means that the rains so far are a mere 
trailer to what is to come. This could be good news for kharif sowing and help the country improve its 
stocks of grain as well as shore up reserves for exports. The way the monsoon and forecasts are framed 
in the Indian context is that more rain is seen as a positive, given its connection to agriculture and that a 
large part of India is entirely reliant, disconcertingly, on the monsoon for a healthy crop. With accelerating 
urbanisation, excess rains are not always an unmitigated good. The floods that overwhelm cities are no 
longer restricted to the major metropolises but also tier-2 and tier-3 towns. While several of these cities 
are not even equipped for 'normal' rainfall, administrations - State and central - must seriously 
incorporate the portent from climate change which translates into citizens navigating erratic rainfall and 
greater disruptions from floods. While improved and high-resolution forecasts are a positive 
development, they have limited value without a wide-ranging societal effort to incorporate its warnings to 
improve everyday living. 
T