Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 7

Price worries: On inflation 
The inflation trajectory suggests a rate cut may remain elusive for some time 
rom a 14-month high of 6.2% in October, consumer price inflation moderated 
to 5.5% last month. Much of this minor respite stems from a decline in the 
inflation rate of some food items. For vegetables, it cooled from a 57-month 
peak of 42.2% to just under 30%, while foodgrain prices rose at the slowest pace in 
28 months, and pulses cooled to just over 5% after a prolonged spell of double-digit 
spikes. Despite these pockets of relief, overall food inflation remained sharp at over 
9% for the third straight month, with edible oil prices firming up 13.3%, the highest in 
30 months as a global price spike has coincided with an import duty hike by the 
Centre. It is no surprise coconut oil prices are up over 42%, even as items such as 
garlic (85.1%), potato (66.7%), cauliflower and cabbage (well over 40%), are pinching 
consumers. While recent conversations about the economy have focused on 
decelerating urban demand, the price rise trend is hitting rural consumers harder 
with close to 6% inflation in November as well as higher food prices. 
Despite assertions by the government that food prices are volatile and should be 
ignored for monetary policy purposes when growth is stumbling, higher spends on 
meals are spilling into other items' prices. Manufacturing and services firms have 
reported intensifying cost pressures last month compelling them to hike prices at the 
highest pace in 12 years. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which had originally 
estimated October-December inflation to average 4.8%, raised it to 5.7% at its 
monetary policy review last week. This implies inflation this month - which will be 
the last data before the RBI's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meets next - could 
still be high at 5.4%. This would be well above the central bank's median target of 4% 
- the MPC now expects average inflation to attain that level only by the second 
quarter of 2025-26. The government, whose clamour for an interest rate cut was 
ignored by the MPC last week, may be hoping its new appointee at the helm of Mint 
Street, another Finance Ministry insider, may oblige with more urgent and bigger rate 
cuts to support growth. While some assert a rate cut in February's MPC meet is 
virtually cemented, going by current trends, the data may not back such a move as 
F 

            growth might recover a bit and inflation may cool a tad more, thus diminishing any 
urgency. That the Centre would have presented its Budget 2025-26 by the next MPC 
meet, may help the rate cut case going forward, if it demonstrates fiscal prudence 
and steps to ease citizens' living costs.


Two to tango: On India-Bangladesh ties 
India and Bangladesh must grapple with the new realities in ties 
midst fast-deteriorating ties between India and Bangladesh, Indian Foreign Secretary Vikram 
Misri's one-day visit to Dhaka provided a much-needed outreach to the interim government led 
by Professor Muhammad Yunus. The bilateral, and once model, relationship, with Bangladesh, 
has been unravelling ever since Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina fled to India. These include 
India's concerns over attacks on minorities, particularly Hindus, Bangladesh's anger over 'unwanted 
Indian interference', and Ms. Hasina's continued stay in India as Bangladesh calls for her to stand trial 
over charges of police crackdowns and corruption. In particular, protests in India against Bangladesh's 
arrest of a Hindu monk for sedition, which led to an attack on their mission in Tripura, and marches 
against Indian missions and cultural centre in Dhaka, had fuelled anger in both capitals. After talks with 
Mr. Yunus, Bangladesh Foreign Affairs Adviser Touhid Hossain and Bangladesh Foreign Secretary 
Muhammad Jashim Uddin, Mr. Misri stressed New Delhi's "desire to work closely with the Interim 
Government of Bangladesh", which was well-received. Unlike the shrill rhetoric in Delhi, his measured 
comments acknowledged the concerns of both sides over the "regrettable incidents of attacks on 
cultural, religious, and diplomatic properties". Mr. Yunus is understood to have described the relationship 
between Bangladesh and India as "very solid" and "close", asking India to help "clear the clouds". He 
also said that Ms. Hasina's statements were creating "tensions" in Bangladesh, an issue that India must 
consider carefully. The two sides also picked up the threads of previous talks on border management, 
trade and connectivity, cooperation in water, energy sectors, development cooperation, consular, cultural 
and people-to-people ties. 
Given the largely positive optics of the visit, it would appear that there is an attempt to chart a new 
course in ties. While it is important for New Delhi to nudge its friends on issues of concern such as the 
attacks on minorities, as well as the need to restore a democratic and inclusive process at the earliest, 
the Modi government must also be prepared to hear the worries of its friends and neighbours on such 
issues that have a spillover effect in the region. At a time when changes in governments in Nepal, Sri 
Lanka and the Maldives have thrown up challenges to India, the violent change in Bangladesh, that saw 
the ouster of an India-friendly leader, was no doubt a blow. It is time, however, for India to engage with 
the new realities in Bangladesh, based on a strong understanding that a close, consultative partnership 
is in the enduring interests of both countries. 
A