Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 22

Burrow tragedy: On the coal mining tragedy in Assam's Dima Hasao 
India must learn from its mining disasters and enforce regulations 
ith four deaths so far, the coal mining tragedy in Assam's Dima Hasao district has 
revived a long-standing debate on the hazardous nature of rat-hole coal mining in 
India. As opposed to modern coal mining, which is mechanized, the 'rat-hole' points 
to the crude and antiquated technique of employing people, and even children, to 
burrow into the ground to scoop out the underground coal. Depending on the depths 
that they plumb, the odds are high that their pickaxes will often unleash a torrent of 
water from a hidden aquifer that can suddenly inundate the excavated tunnel - as it 
is suspected to have happened at Dima Hasao. Because such accidents have recurred over the 
decades, along with the attendant health and environmental hazards, this mode of mining was banned 
by the National Green Tribunal (NGT) in 2014. The use of proper geological surveys and appropriate 
machinery would have made the mine economically unviable. The Assam Chief Minister has stated that 
the mine appeared to be "prime facie... illegal" and one abandoned by the State's Mines and Minerals 
Department. If that is the case, it reflects poorly on the State administration that such mines can be 
exploited by unscrupulous elements with such ease, despite the ban. Surely, this is only a fraction of the 
unregulated mining that actually goes on. 
The Supreme Court of India, in 2019, had asked whether it was possible for such mining to continue 
without the "connivance" of officials, when it was examining the rescue of 15 miners trapped in a rat-
hole mine in the East Jaintia Hills in December 2018. A report submitted by a monitoring committee set 
up by the NGT observed that despite the ban, the demand for coal to power cement manufacturing and 
thermal power plants in the northeast had sustained and supported rat-hole coal mining. On the other 
hand, when convenient, State authorities have sought out and even felicitated rat-hole miners, some 
from Assam, as in 2023, when they were called in as a last resort after advanced machinery and the 
expertise of professional geologists and earth scientists had failed to rescue 41 construction workers 
trapped in the large, over-ground Silkiyara tunnel in Uttarkashi. The Dima Hasao operation too, like 
others, will end and the net success or failure of saving those trapped will induce a familiar amnesia that 
will be broken only by the next accident. Until decisive action to puncture the economics of rat-hole 
mining is taken, India is only burrowing the way to another tragedy.


Kumbh is Coming, Manage the Crowds 
We are as much a religious bunch as we are populous. But we are also unhealthily chaotic. The Lord 
Venkateswara temple at Tirumala, Tirupati district, in Andhra Pradesh, is praised as one of India's best-
managed religious tourism sites. Wednesday night's stampede shattered this notion. At some juncture, 
overcrowding spiralled out of control, as the gates were opened to assist an unwell devotee out of the 
queue. Pilgrims waiting for hours surged forward, triggering a deadly congestion. Inadequate crowd-
control measures and procedures were squarely to blame for the tragedy. In India, where unruly crowd 
behaviour is the norm - you just have to see how air travellers behave the moment a flight lands and 
comes to a stop mere planning is insufficient. More trained personnel than anticipated are required, 
especially to handle emergencies. This is not a matter of resources. Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams is 
one of the wealthiest religious institutions in the world. In 2024 alone, over 22.5 mn pilgrims visited the 
temple, contributing ₹1,365 cr to hundi collections. 
The damning truth is that India consistently fails to learn from past tragedies, or to upgrade its crowd 
management systems. Only six months ago, UP's Hathras district witnessed a horrific stampede, where 
over 120 people mostly women and children-lost their lives in a frenzy to collect dust from a god- man's 
car's tyre tracks. Lives here don't seem precious enough; little seems to change. With the Kumbh 
starting in Allahabad on Monday, the latest Tirupati incident must serve as a wake-up call. The faithful 
should not have to visit their places of worship with a sense of dire fatalism. The same holds for crowd 
management of any high-density gatherings, religious or secular.