Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 2

A slow return: On border tensions and India-China ties 
India and China must engage intensely at all levels to resolve border disputes 
The government's decision to offer statements on China, suo motu, in both Houses of Parliament and to 
brief a parliamentary panel are positive but long overdue steps. Since 2020, following the Chinese 
transgression along the Line of Actual Control (LAC) and the deadly Galwan clashes, it has avoided 
divulging details of the negotiations with China over the actions of the People's Liberation Army (PLA), 
only announcing agreements on disengagement at six points of friction, as they occurred in 2021, 2022 
and 2024. In a democracy, the people must not be kept in the dark on matters of national interest. But 
the statements by External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar and the briefing by Foreign Secretary Vikram 
Misri appearto have been substantial. Mr. Jaishankar focused on three aspects of the LAC negotiations. 
He said India has made it clear to China that "normal" engagement in other parts of the relationship were 
contingent on the LAC tensions being resolved. India has adopted a policy of "continuous engagement" 
and a step-by-step approach involving 17 meetings of the Working Mechanism for Consultation and 
Coordination on India-China Border Affairs, 21 meetings of the Senior Highest Military Commanders 
meeting mechanism, and several meetings between the Foreign and Defence Ministers and Special 
Representatives of both countries. Finally, he said that with disengagement "fully achieved", the next 
priorities would be troop de-escalation and de-induction, followed by a discussion on how to manage ties 
in the border areas, given the problems in the last few years. Mr. Jaishankar said that for Depsang and 
Demchok, "patrolling arrangements" had been agreed upon, but the resumption of patrols is still 
"underway". For the other areas of North and South Pangong Tso lake, Gogra and Hot Springs, 
disengagement had been achieved through "steps of a temporary and limited nature" - a euphemism 
for LAC "buffer zones". 
But the government's nearly 2,500 word statement gave no indication of the casus belli for the Chinese 
actions nor any reference to when the return to 'status quo ante', or to positions of 2020, can be 
expected. The statement laid stress on India's "national security" interests being upheld, without 
mentioning India's "territorial integrity" at any point. The government must now expedite efforts to build a 
common understanding of the LAC and to demarcate the boundary. It is important to tell the nation about 
the nearly 20 Modi-Xi meetings prior to 2020, in spite of which the PLA acted the way it did. The past few 
years should have demonstrated to the 'doves and hawks' in India's establishment that such an intensive 
engagement is no guarantor of peace, nor can conflicts be resolved without the kind of intense and 
"continuous engagement" that New Delhi and Beijing have sustained in the past few years.


ONOS bitten: On India's 'One Nation, One Subscription' plan 
Bringing down cost of access to research papers is only one of many issues 
While generally undesirable, centralization promised to be a boon vis-à-vis public access to research 
through India's 'One Nation, One Subscription' (ONOS) plan. ONOS was first proposed in the country's 
fifth draft National Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy (2020) in response to the hefty fees 
research journals charged - and still do - for scholars and the people at large to access the papers 
they published. In this revenue model, journals accept and publish papers submitted by scholars and 
charge those who want to read them a fee. Research institutes also subscribe to these journals, so 
scholars can avail all the papers through their libraries. As these fees climbed over time, librarians 
banded up in consortia to increase their bargaining power at negotiations. ONOS, which the Union 
Cabinet approved on November 25, replaces these consortia with the national government and obliges 
journals to provide a single fee to access them. The upshot is expensive journals will now become 
available at underfunded government institutes as well. 
However, ONOS will be limited to publicly funded institutes; and it allows the stranglehold of commercial 
publishers on scholarly publishing to continue. Many journals subsist on publicly funded research while 
also charging people money to access it. ONOS may reduce these sums but the government's 
willingness to allocate ₹6,000 crore for three calendar years for 30 major publishers must be seen 
against the backdrop of the gross expenditure on research and development as a fraction of the GDP 
having become stagnant. The government could have promoted the adoption of 'green' and/or 'diamond' 
open-access models that guarantee public access by default or have supported, as a matter of policy, 
home-grown journals sensitive to Indian scholars' circumstances while enhancing the discoverability of 
their research. The decision to instead channel a large sum of money to publishers abroad does not 
factor in India's potential to influence research access modalities in the developing world. The lack of 
transparency is also perturbing, including over whether the list of journals will be monitored to cull titles 
that have become irrelevant or predatory, or to add those that have gained currency in recent years. 
Most of all, at a time when many journals have switched to 'gold' open-access - where researchers pay 
to have a paper published that is then available for free - and preprint papers are gaining in popularity 
as a means of communicating research, the government's justification for adopting the ONOS strategy in 
its present form is weak. Add to this the absence of consultation with the institutes on their specific 
needs, and any 

            celebration of ONOS will have to be deemed premature.