Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 64

A question of hygiene: On the Guillain-Barré Syndrome outbreak in Pune 
The GBS outbreak in Pune reveals the fragility of its urban systems 
It the heart of the current Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) outbreak in Pune, where over 100 
cases of suspected GBS have been recorded, is a bacterial infection. A health investigation 
has revealed Campylobacter jejuni, a bacteria found in contaminated food and water, to be 
behind the first cluster of cases. In almost all the patients, recent case history has shown 
episodes of gastroenteritis, vomiting, diarrhea and nausea before the onset of the 
characteristic peripheral numbing of GBS, leading to paralysis. One case of death due to 
suspected GBS has also been recorded - of a patient who had visited Pune. This outbreak reveals the 
fragility of the scaffolding that urban systems in India are built on, with pathogens managing to breach 
all safety nets that humans have built for themselves, to emerge through and cause havoc. Any slip up in 
maintenance or in surveillance, clearly leads to discomfort, ill health and debility for a large number of 
people. GBS is a rare, autoimmune neurological disorder, in which a person's immune system launches 
an attack on the peripheral nervous system, leading to tingling, weakening of muscles, numbing and 
paralysis in the arms and legs, not unlike in the acute flaccid paralysis of polio. It can be caused by viral 
or bacterial pre-infections, as per the World Health Organization (WHO). Globally, it is estimated that 
GBS has an incidence of 1-2 per 1,00,000 population, and is more predominant among adult males. 
While India-specific large epidemiological studies on GBS are lacking, as testing for GBS in a resource-
poor setting is difficult, according to a WHO report (1993), it was estimated that 138 cases of GBS were 
seen annually in seven major teaching hospitals, with approximately 75% of cases occurring in adults. 
While studies across the world have shown numbers to rise in seasons of weather change, it is possible 
that this is India's largest outbreak in recorded history. 
Patients are treated with plasma exchange or intravenous immunoglobulin therapy, and most recover. 
However, these treatments are most effective if started within two weeks of the first symptoms, making 
early detection and initiation of treatment absolutely crucial. Rapid response teams in Pune are in place, 
collecting water samples and mounting surveillance on the community, and a central team has also been 
rushed to affected areas. It is key to ensure that all measures are in place to pick up patients, and initiate 
treatment as soon as possible. It is the duty of the local and State governance to provide clean drinking 
water to all residents and ensure that adequate social messaging is provided periodically on avoiding 
contaminated, unhygienic food. 
A


Stifling demand: On the MGNREGS 
MGNREGS should not be let down by funding issues and wage delays 
The efficacy of a welfare programme is directly proportional to the enthusiasm of the 
government implementing it. The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (MGNREGS) will soon be completing 20 years of its implementation. The fact that it 
has not only survived but also thrived under two regimes across multiple terms suggests its 
utility and popularity among the rural poor, though, under the National Democratic Alliance, 
the scheme has acquired a status of being an unwanted necessity after being seen initially as someone 
else's baby. But as the COVID-19 pandemic showed, the MGNREGS was a necessity and vital in terms 
of the sustenance it provided to both rural workers and migrant labour returning to their rural homes 
after the lockdowns were announced. And it is fair to say that it is now seen as "unwanted", as 
allocations in percentage terms of consecutive Budgets have reduced substantially since the pandemic 
(from 3.2% in FY21 to 1.78% in FY25 (BE)). Besides, despite the fact that the scheme is demand driven, 
inevitably leading to the allocation of additional funds beyond the budgeted expenditure, no extra 
allocation for MGNREGS has been made this financial year even as wages have been delayed and, due 
to this, demand also suppressed artificially. Reportedly, the Rural Development Ministry was short of 
₹4,315 crore for the wages and the Centre has a liability of ₹5,715 crore against its share for material 
component of the works to be done under the scheme. 
There are other issues with MGNREGS implementation that require attention - the need to adjust 
wages to inflation, and the issues concerning the seeding of job cards with the Aadhaar-based 
payment system, among others. But the core of the scheme remains the adequacy of the allocations 
made for it by the Centre. By pruning funds, the purpose of providing demand-driven employment is 
under-served and it is unfair to rural workers across the country who have used the scheme to 
augment their incomes, especially in the agricultural off-seasons. There has been much academic study 
detailing the fruits of the scheme - from helping the destitute to creating village assets such as 
irrigation canals, rural roads, and water conservation facilities. A demand-driven exercise such as this 
scheme also puts disposable income in the hands of the village poor and helps the rural economy. The 
importance of MGNREGS in a country still facing rural poverty needs no elaboration. The Union 
government must change its attitude towards the MGNREGS. A substantial allocation in the Union 
Budget, that is true to the demand for the scheme, would be a good start.