Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 105

Justice and equality: On organ transplantation, gender skew 
Those most in need of organ transplantation should not be denied it 
hen decisions are based on the principle of natural justice, they serve a particular 
social purpose or aim to right a specific wrong. The National Organ and Tissue 
Transplant Organization's (NOTTO) recent advisory, stating that women patients and 
relatives of deceased donors awaiting transplants will get priority as beneficiaries, 
walks the path of rewriting a gender trope. There is a gender skew as NOTTO's 
decadal data (2013-23) indicates. As per NOTTO, in 2023, women constituted 63% of all living donor 
transplants, and yet they comprised between 24% (for heart) and 47% (lung) as beneficiaries of organs 
for transplantation. In kidney transplants, women were only 37% of the beneficiaries in 2023, while for 
liver, women's share was 30%. For pancreas transplant, women totalled up to 26% of total beneficiaries. 
Analysis in the British Medical Journal showed that in the past five years, women contributed to 36,038 
of the 56,509 living organ donations in India, and benefited from transplantation in only 17,041 cases. 
NOTTO, in its advisory, said the recommendation was an attempt to address the gender imbalance 
among organ transplant recipients; to make provisions for additional points in the allocation criteria for 
women patients in the waiting. 
While certainly laudable in what it sets out to do, this move could well be beset with procedural hassles. 
Currently, organ allotment protocols do not allow for prioritising any one recipient over another, except on 
grounds of health. There are, therefore, no provisions to prioritise women and/or near relatives of 
previous donors. Since the NOTTO advisory, questions have also been raised about whom the definition 
of 'near relatives' should include, and if all families involved in __________ cadaveric organs for 
transplantation (since 1995) would be considered beneficiaries. The primary fear among implementers 
seems to be that this might become another backdoor way to facilitate out-of-turn allotments, 
particularly as organ harvesting rackets continue to be busted in India. However, it makes little sense to 
throw the baby out with the bathwater, particularly when operating with the intent to be more inclusive, 
in a society shaped by patriarchal norms. It is crucial that NOTTO makes this a participative process, 
taking along various agencies involved in implementation. While it is important to ensure proper 
implementation under the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, and widen access to the limited pool of 
organs, above all, it is imperative that the principle of not denying anyone whose need for an organ is 
the greatest, based on health parameters, is always adhered to. 
W


Limited gains: On the inflation space 
A temporary blip in inflation will help, but not by much 
rom having to deal with an inflation level higher than the RBI's comfort band of 2%-6% just 
two years ago, the government is now in the relatively more comfortable space of inflation 
coming in lower than that band. July's retail inflation of 1.55%, the lowest since June 2017, 
was made possible almost entirely by the contraction in food prices. This is particularly 
significant because the statistical base effect was low in July. That is, food inflation in July 
2024 was itself at a 13-month low. A contraction in prices this July over that figure implies a real 
reduction in prices rather than a statistical anomaly.  The consensus among economists is that this will 
continue due to improved sowing, a good monsoon, and a favourable base effect as inflation had 
surged again in the latter half of last year. The other positive was that core inflation, which removes the 
effect of fuel and food, fell to 4.1%, which is the RBI's target. On balance, the outlook for inflation looks 
good, especially due to the monsoon's progress. There is some risk, especially if India decides to switch 
away from Russian oil and opts for the somewhat more expensive Gulf oil. But this is unlikely given the 
government's assertions that it will prioritise India's interests. In any case, the Trump-Putin meet could 
potentially render the latest tariff obstacles inconsequential. 
The RBI expects inflation to pick up only from January 2026. But there is no time for complacency. 
While India is far from being in a persistent low-inflation, low-growth stagnation, it is staring at a growth 
slowdown. The latest growth in the Index of Industrial Production was at a 10-month low, with capital 
and consumer goods activity anaemic. Growth in GST revenue slowed to single-digits in June and July. 
The contraction in gross direct tax collections this financial year is also concerning. Car sales to 
dealers dropped to an 18-month low in June. UPI transactions, touted in the past as a sign of buoyant 
economic activity, fell as compared to the previous month thrice so far in 2025.  The RBI has retained its 
forecast of 6.5% growth this financial year, which looks _________. Even if the U.S.'s additional 25% 
tariffs are removed, the initial 25% will themselves likely reduce India's growth by 0.2 percentage points. 
India's growth is not robust enough for it to be blase about such a loss. Structural problems remain, 
demand is still weak, and a temporary dip in inflation is in itself not going to help much.