Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 66

Not business as usual: On upholding India's reputation for quality drugs 
India's reputation for high-quality generic drugs should not be put at risk 
The pharmacy of the global South is facing a crisis of reputation. After cough syrups made by 
pharmaceutical companies based in India, which had unacceptable amounts of diethylene 
glycol and/or ethylene glycol, killed 66 children in the Gambia, 65 children in Uzbekistan in 
2022, and 12 children in Cameroon in 2023, and India-made eye drops contaminated by drug-
resistant bacteria killed three persons and blinded eight in the U.S., again in 2023, the spotlight is back 
on Indian drug companies for all the wrong reasons. A BBC Eye investigation has brought to light the 
criminal actions of Aveo Pharmaceuticals, a Maharashtra-based company, which was manufacturing and 
exporting unapproved, highly addictive opioid drug combinations to West Africa. The "medicines" contain 
tapentadol, a powerful opioid, and carisoprodol, a highly addictive muscle relaxant. While the Indian drug 
regulator has approved tapentadol and carisoprodol as standalone drugs, the combination has no 
clearance. Even if the company's claim that the drug combination has been approved by the State drug 
authority turns out to be correct, it is still illegal as only the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
(CDSCO) can approve any novel fixed dose combination (FDC) drugs for safety and efficacy. It is only 
after this approval that State drug authorities can issue a manufacturing licence. The Health Ministry 
routinely banning FDCs is only because the State drug authorities ignore this provision in the law with 
impunity. 
India questioned and denied the World Health Organization's report about the lethal cough syrup sent to 
Gambia, but in the latest case, CDSCO and the State regulatory authority swung into action even in the 
absence of any complaint by West African countries. The reason: the BBC investigation's irrefutable 
video evidence that the company was in the "business" of manufacturing and exporting the dangerous 
combination drug despite knowing the harmful effects. The seizure of nearly 13 million "medicines" and 
26 batches of active pharmaceutical ingredients of tapentadol and carisoprodol are clinching evidence 
for taking criminal action against the company. While the moves by the authorities - to issue a 'stop 
activity' order, withdraw the manufacturing licence and permission to export the drugs by any company, 
and a show cause notice - inspire some confidence, only stringent punishment can serve as a 
deterrent. Indian pharmaceutical companies are known in the global South for their high-quality generic 
drugs. It is for the drug regulator to ensure that India continues to be famous for this and not gain 
notoriety for producing and exporting deadly synthetic opioids as drugs. Manufacturing synthetic opioid 
drugs cannot be any pharmaceutical company's "business". 
T


Counting matters: On delimitation, federalism, the Census 
Delimitation must remain true to both representation and federalism 
y calling for an all-party meeting on March 5 to discuss the delimitation exercise, Tamil Nadu 
Chief Minister M.K. Stalin has sought to stir up a national debate. Delimitation, as an exercise, 
has not seen any increase in the legislative seats since 1973, having been frozen as per the 
1971 Census for parity in population growth across States. This was done to prevent States 
with a higher population growth from getting "rewarded" with a higher number of 
representatives at the cost of other States with better health indices and lower growth. The 
84th constitutional Amendment had stipulated that the delimitation exercise would be based on the first 
Census after 2026. Is the Union government inexplicably delaying the Census exercise to allow for the 
delimitation exercise to be held earlier? In the normal scheme of things, the exercise would have been 
done after the 2031 Census, but it is now possible after 2026 once the Census (due in 2021), is 
conducted. 
The concern of Tamil Nadu that the exercise could hurt its representation in Parliament is legitimate if 
the Centre intends the process to be only proportionally representative of each State's population. This 
is illustrated in the population growth rates (1971-2024) in Tamil Nadu and undivided Bihar. The 
electorate, for which recent data is available, grew by 171% in the former as against 233% in the latter, 
while they had a comparable number of Lok Sabha MPs (39 versus 54, including Jharkhand). If 
delimitation was held and constituencies redrawn to match population growth, and even if the overall 
Lok Sabha tally was increased, the final number for Tamil Nadu would clearly be much lower than 
Bihar's. Other States with reduced fertility rates, such as Kerala and Karnataka, will also be affected. 
Home Minister Amit Shah has said that there will be no "reduction on a pro-rata basis" for Southern 
States and that they would get their "rightful share" but there has been little clarity on whether this would 
mean that their proportion of representatives will be retained after delimitation. The significant increase 
in population since 1973 should lead to an increased number of representatives, and, therefore, a higher 
number of seats, especially in north India's highly populated States. Yet, the equally important principle 
of federalism should suggest the need for the proportions of representation to be maintained to keep the 
balance of power intact across States. More importantly, the government must expedite the Census just 
to allay concerns that it has been delayed to facilitate an earlier and controversial delimitation. A nation 
striving to reach the higher pedestals of world power cannot afford to delay the basic exercise of 
counting the number of its own people.