Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 106

Graveyard Gaza: On Israel's Netanyahu and control over Gaza 
The West must pressure Israel to end the war immediately 
The decision by Israel's Security Cabinet to expand the war and seize control of Gaza City is a 
direct affront to mounting international concerns over the appalling humanitarian crisis in the 
Palestinian enclave. The world's leading genocide scholars, along with international and 
Israeli human rights organisations, say Israel is committing genocide against Palestinians. 
Two former Israeli Prime Ministers have come out against the war, while most former IDF and 
intelligence chiefs have called for its end. Global outrage intensified over Israel's forced starvation, 
which caused famine and the deaths of children from malnutrition. Even France, the U.K. and Canada, 
some of Israel's closest allies, have demanded a ceasefire and promised to recognize Palestinian 
statehood. Yet, Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel's discredited Prime Minister, who is facing an arrest 
warrant at the International Criminal Court, has not paid any attention. He has said that there was no 
starvation in Gaza even as images of skeletal children have shocked the world. He has gone against the 
concerns of the IDF's top command to secure approval from the Security Cabinet for his plan to take 
control of Gaza. This would extend the offensive into the coastal strip stretching from Gaza City in the 
north to Khan Younus in the south, where thousands of displaced Palestinians have now squeezed 
themselves into tents, makeshift shelters and bombed-out buildings. 
Mr. Netanyahu says that he intends to take full control of Gaza, but does not wish to keep it. He cannot 
be trusted. In April 2024, he claimed Israel was "a step away from victory". In March 2025, he broke a 
ceasefire and resumed the assault, and imposed a blockade on Gaza, which triggered the starvation 
crisis. Two of his Cabinet colleagues have repeatedly called for Israel to seize Gaza, expel its 
Palestinian population and resettle the enclave with Jews. The way Israel has been conducting the war 
and its decision to expand the offensive only reinforce the argument that its intention has always been to 
take over the enclave, even at the cost of expelling its over two million residents. Israel is able to pursue 
this course only because of its military, financial and political support from the West, particularly the U.S. 
European governments must move beyond verbal criticism and adopt concrete measures to hold Israel 
accountable for its crimes, like they do with other rogue states. And if U.S. President Donald Trump, 
who calls himself 'a man of peace', does not want to be complicit in these atrocities, he should demand 
that Mr. Netanyahu end the war immediately. 
T


Crossing a line: On drive against undocumented immigrants 
The drive against illegal immigrants is hurting Indian citizens too 
olice in several Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-ruled States are trying to identify 
undocumented Bangladeshi immigrants by their language: Bengali. This approach has led 
to some comical errors, such as the Delhi police listing "Bangladeshi" as a language - a 
massive leap in linguistics. However, in most cases, this has become a tragic and farcical 
exercise. Several documented instances have shown Indian citizens being pushed across the 
border into Bangladesh. This has caused significant hardship for the families involved and 
embarrassment to the government. Some individuals have been repatriated to their families in West 
Bengal after intervention by the State government or courts. This "pushback" of suspected 
Bangladeshis is a part of a larger effort to bypass the due process of law, which is often lengthy and 
rigorous. The rounding up of Bengali speakers has sparked a debate in West Bengal, where the ruling 
party, the Trinamool Congress, has called it an "attack on Bengali identity" and launched a language 
movement. 
The targeting of Bengali migrants has immediate consequences for their livelihoods. Fearing detention 
and forced relocation to Bangladesh - a country to which they may have no connection - many 
migrant workers from West Bengal have left their jobs. In one particular case, Delhi police detained 
Bengali speakers who had been granted Indian citizenship under a well-known land exchange treaty 
with Bangladesh signed by the Narendra Modi government. Bengali is India's second-largest language 
by number of speakers. The State of West Bengal is both a source and a destination for migrant 
workers. The divisions being created over language and identity could easily escalate into conflict and 
violence. Even for the BJP, this exercise makes little political sense and may be counterproductive 
ahead of the 2026 Assembly elections in West Bengal. The migrant workers from West Bengal who are 
being harassed in other States do not belong to a single community. BJP leaders in West Bengal are 
already facing criticism over the issue and are setting up camps to assist citizens with the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act in various constituencies across the State. The issue of Bangladeshi citizens entering 
and working in India is not new. For decades, people from the neighbouring country have entered India 
for political and social reasons, including better economic opportunities. The boundaries of India are a 
creation of colonialism and a violent history of political conflicts. While sovereign borders must be 
protected, the central government must ensure that law enforcement does not become 
counterproductive and lead to the harassment of its citizens. 
P