Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 80

Readiness, not panic: On India and COVID-19 
COVID-19 resurgence calls for better preparedness 
helessonsof the past shouldserve as a good guide, especially the learnings from three years 
of COVID-19. The country's COVID-19 dashboard has seen some activity in recent weeks, 
and the total number(since January 2025) of COVID cases iscurrently at 3961 (as on June 2, 
2025, 8 a.m.), and the number of deaths recorded as 32. While a figure in 1000s seems a bit 
alarming, it is still a small number in a country with a population of over 1.4 billion. It is also 
important to take a look at the full picture. Not all States have had a day-on-day hike in numbers testing 
positive for COVID, and all hikes are still in the single or low double digits. Also, 2,188 people have been 
discharged since, underlining what experts have been saying as the curve rose this year: that the 
variantscausing infection now areOmicron subvariants and that they are neither more transmissible nor 
do they cause worse disease than in the past. 
While panic and anxiety might be unwarranted, a sense of caution and precautionary approach are 
advisable, particularly for those with vulnerabilities and co-morbid conditions. Experience from the 
pandemic is that people with other pre-existing co-morbidities are disproportionately affected by COVID-
19 infection. Common comorbidities include hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, obesity, 
and kidney diseases, and advancing age (post 60 years). People with these conditions must start 
masking up in public places, and hand wash regularly. Former World Health Organization Chief Scientist 
Soumya Swaminathan has said the recent immunity from the pandemic will stand in good stead, but 
again, to take possible precautions including giving boosters or vaccine shots, especially to the 
vulnerable. This is where the government must step in, as COVID vaccines or boosters are not available 
in most parts of the country, even urban centres. India, a signatory to the World Health Organization 
Pandemic Agreement, mustfirst ensure that stockpilesof vaccines and diagnostic kits arecreated and 
distributed across the country. Both public and private sector hospitals must ensure that 
healthinfrastructure- particularly the availability of medical oxygen, adequate beds and health-care 
personnel - isin a state of readiness. Another scenariothat must be avoided at all costs isthe deliberate 
obfuscation of data on true numbers on infections or deaths as during the pandemic. Instead, 
transparency and efficiency must guide both the Centre and the States, this time, irrespective of how the 
COVID curve behaves. But panic is not the same as preparedness: one is debilitating, the other is 
enabling. 
T


Same page: on monetary policy, the RBI, the Government 
The RBI and the government are now aligned on boosting growth 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Monetary Policy Committee's decisions, on Friday, show that 
the central bank is now unequivocally choosing growth in the perennial growth-inflation trade-
off. This is the correct approach at this time. The first major decision was to cut the repo rate 
by 50 basis points to 5.5%. It comes on the back of two cuts of 25 basis points each, in 
February and April. With the latest retail inflation coming in at a 69-month low, and generally exhibiting a 
subdued trend, price stability has now been relegated as a secondary concern. These rate cuts will, once 
the banks transmit them to borrowers, make it cheaper for companies and consumers to borrow to invest 
and purchase. The second major decision, of slashing the cash reserve ratio by 100 basis points, will 
help with the transmission of the rate cuts. The less that banks have to keep with themselves, as 
stipulated by the cash reserve ratio, the more they can lend out - and now at lower rates. It is worth 
noting, however, that the central bank has again changed its stance. In April, it had moved from being 
neutral to being accommodative, indicating that it was inclined to cut rates further. It has now moved 
back to neutral, meaning more rate cuts in the short term are unlikely, unless growth falls well short of 
expectations. This is a sensible stance to take, given the vast uncertainties that the Indian and global 
economies are facing. The neutral stance also means that the RBI is equally predisposed to raise rates 
again in the event of an unforeseen and sustained spike in prices. The monsoon is yet to fully play out, 
after all. 
The timing of these decisions is sound. Inflation is low and not likely to jump any time soon if current 
factors remain unchanged. Further, there are no major elections now that would otherwise have 
necessitated a pre-emptive strong grip on price levels. On the other hand, growth is lower than it could 
be. The RBI has projected growth in the current financial year 2025-26 to be 6.5%, which is no faster 
than what the government provisionally estimated for the previous year. Fiscal policy in terms of 
government spending has reached the limit of the stimulus it can provide. After a decade of increasing 
outlays, government capital expenditure can at best be maintained at the level it is at, but cannot 
reasonably be expected to grow much further. Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and officials in the 
Ministry of Finance have indicated as much. Apart from developmental and social priorities, the 
government now has additional defence spending to account for. Monetary policy has to step up and 
boost growth, and it is good to see the RBI and the government on the same page. 
T