Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 96

Editorial                                                      July 24, 2025 
Reimagining the urban future 
The past few monsoons have revealed the 
disquieting inadequacy of urban planning and 
infrastructure in India. This season, the cities in the 
National Capital Region, for instance, are struggling to 
function after intense rainfall, thanks to clogged drains and 
construction that disregards topography. In summer, many 
cities report heat deaths and crippling water shortages. 
Against this backdrop, the findings of the World Bank's 
Towards Resilient and Prosperous Cities in India report 
should be a wake-up call. To blunt the triple threat of 
flooding, water scarcity, and heat, India's urban centres 
need a minimum investment of $2.4 trillion by 2050, the 
report estimates. While investments in the urban sector 
have been scaled up through initiatives such as AMRUT, 
the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, the PM-AWAS Yojana, and the 
recently concluded Smart Cities Mission, there is still a 
huge gap. And to make the most of even the available 
funds, city administrations need adequate capacity to 
prepare 
impactful 
projects, 
ensure 
proper 
T

Editorial                                                      July 24, 2025 
implementation, and monitor their effectiveness in the 
long-run. 
The problem of capacities runs deeper than just the ability 
to spend funds. What cities lack is the ability to raise 
finances - even basic user charges for municipal services 
and taxes are not adequately collected. To employ 
innovative instruments such as green municipal bonds or 
getting the private sector to partner in building the climate 
resilience would require city administrations to set their 
house in order. More importantly, power and finances 
need to be adequately devolved to urban local bodies. To 
that end, executive and political imagination needs to be 
unlocked to suit the future needs. These findings outline 
the 
challenges 
- 
financial, 
environmental, 
and 
administrative - that lie ahead. Without adequate 
spending on climate adaptation infrastructure - better 
drainage, architecture that reduces the need for cooling 
and lighting - an urban crisis looms. For instance, heat 
mitigation measures can save up to 130,000 lives and 
increase the GDP by 0.4% a year, against the backdrop of 
exposure to dangerous heat stress having doubled 
between 1983-1990 and 2010-2016 in 10 of India's largest 

Editorial                                                      July 24, 2025 
cities. Similarly, losses from pluvial flooding could worsen 
without regular upkeep and upgrades of the drainage 
system. All this calls for urgent municipal action, especially 
since India's urban population is expected to rise from 480 
million in 2020 to 950 million by 2050. That only half the 
infrastructure needed to support the growth in urban 
population has been built (as the report says) is both a 
challenge 
and 
an 
opportunity. 
The 
report's 
recommendation that a dedicated national urban 
resilience programme be developed along with a financing 
strategy needs a close look.


Editorial                                                      July 29, 2025 
Lessons from the past: On the Chola legacy 
The Chola legacy includes good governance, 
not just grand temples 
The visit of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to Tamil 
Nadu had a subtle political message. In his address 
at the valediction of the annual Aadi Thiruvathirai 
festival at Gangaikonda Cholapuram to mark the birth 
anniversary of Rajendra Chola I, he focused on the legacy 
of the Chola emperor and his father Rajaraja Chola I to 
underline that contemporary India would be as 
enterprising as ancient India under the imperial Cholas, in 
expanding trade, and in guarding India's sovereignty. The 
festival was also organised to commemorate 1,000 years 
of the maritime expedition of Rajendra Chola to south-
east Asia as well as the construction of the iconic temple, 
a World Heritage Site. The grandeur of the Chola dynasty 
is fascinating to recall, but there are other mundane facets 
of the Chola rule which are of modern relevance - its 
water management, tax and land revenue collection, and 
democratic processes. 
T

Editorial                                                      July 29, 2025 
In creating infrastructure, especially, the Cholas hold many 
lessons. In recent months, there have been fatal accidents 
involving civic structures. The resilience of the 
Brihadisvara temples, which have stood tall for over 1,000 
years, could provide learnings. Studies show that the 
southern peninsula was the epicentre of several 
earthquakes in the last 200-odd years. Archaeologists are 
of the view that the superstructure of the temples holds 
the key to modern building techniques when it comes to 
seismic resilience. A close study of the temples for 
structural stability can be of immense value in the 
contemporary context. Apart from focusing on the 
heritage and culture of the Cholas, India could try and 
replicate their success in administration. Management of 
water resources, especially, could be an important 
learning. The Cauvery delta, where Gangaikonda 
Cholapuram is located, may experience floods, with a large 
volume of water draining into the sea without being 
harnessed for periods of scarcity. More than 30 years have 
passed since the adoption of the 73rd and 74th 
Amendments to the Constitution, but a large number of 
local bodies, even in the major cities, are functioning 

Editorial                                                      July 29, 2025 
without elected representatives. The celebration is an 
opportunity for an analysis of the functioning of 
grassroots-level democratic bodies. Mr. Modi announced 
that the Centre would install the statues of Rajaraja Chola 
and Rajendra Chola to remind the country of its historical 
consciousness. But this exercise would have greater 
purpose if it reminds the country of the administrative 
acumen of the Cholas, and nudges those in governance to 
address many of the chronic flaws and problems.