Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 41

Good news, and bad: On the economy 
As retail inflation ebbs, Government must focus on improving farmer income 
India's March retail inflation was down to a near six-year low of 3.34%, making it almost certain that 
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) will cut its banks' lending rate further over the next few Monetary 
Policy Committee meetings. The repo rate has already been cut twice in a row, by 25 basis points 
(bps) each, in February and April, bringing it down from 6.5% to 6%, signaling the emphasis on 
growth, amid global trade uncertainties, as the RBI's concern over non-core inflation eases. 
Vegetable prices have plummeted over the past four months from the highs of October 2024, when food 
inflation peaked at 10.87%, the highest since November 2013. Food inflation in March fell to 2.69% aided 
by a contraction in the prices of vegetables (-7.04%), eggs (-3.16%) and pulses (-2.73%). The repo rate 
reduction has already begun translating into lower interest on bank loans. In normal times, this would 
translate into greater capital flows into businesses, thereby raising jobs, incomes and consumption. But it 
comes at a time of dampening investor confidence: U.S.-led tariff uncertainty is forcing exporters to 
scramble for newer markets, amid a concern over near-term demand contraction, as America has been 
India's largest buyer of merchandise goods since fiscal year 2022. Easing inflation could raise domestic 
consumption and India's sluggish industrial production. 
What must concern policymakers more should be the steep fall in food prices, as this means lower 
farmer incomes, directly impacting rural consumption demand. Last December, the government procured 
eight tonnes of tomatoes in Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh, as prices in the local market plummeted to ₹1 a 
kilogram. In February this year, in Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, an 80% fall in tomato prices forced 
farmers to dump produce or use them as cattle feed. A 2022 study by the Ministry of Food Processing 
pegged India's post-harvest loss at a whopping ₹1.52 trillion annually, ranging between 6% to 15% of 
produce depending on the crop and region. This is due to widespread shortages in cold storage facilities 
and temperature-controlled transport for perishables, and market inaccessibility for farmers. A significant 
86% of Indian farmers make a living from less than two hectares of land. A 2021-22 NABARD survey 
pegged average monthly agricultural household income at ₹13,661. A more comprehensive NSSO 2019 
survey estimates this to be ₹10,218. These figures are lower than those in other emerging economies 
such as China, Mexico and Brazil for the corresponding years. While rural consumption has been rising 
since the COVID-19 pandemic years, monthly per capita consumption expenditure for rural areas in 
fiscal 2024 was ₹4,122, while in urban areas, it was ₹6,996, indicating the significant gap that must be 
viewed as an opportunity, at a time when export growth is expected to be sluggish.


The missing middle: on Budget session of Parliament, debate 
No legislation finds bipartisan support in Parliament 
The Budget session of Parliament was notable for reasons both good and bad. The sittings of 
the two Houses stretched beyond midnight to clear the Waqf (Amendment) Bill 2025. The 
debates reflected the significant divergence of opinion on the management of Waqf 
properties, but were held in a convivial atmosphere. The Chairs of both Houses were elated 
to preside over a productive session and the ruling BJP was content to find allies strongly on 
its side, particularly on the Waqf law amendment. Parliament also approved President's Rule 
in Manipur, following debates held past midnight. The Opposition was buoyant that it got to 
have its say. It had its constituents holding together, and it even attracted some fence-sitters on select 
issues during the session. The BJP not only managed to steer the legislative agenda but also played to 
the gallery to please its political constituency. It was, however, not all good news. Off the floor of 
Parliament, business advisory committee meetings of the two Houses saw sharp exchanges, in one 
instance prompting Rajya Sabha Chairman Jagdeep Dhankhar to walk out. The stand-off between the 
Congress and Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla, on the Lok Sabha Leader of the Opposition, Rahul Gandhi, 
not being given adequate opportunities to speak, remained unresolved. 
The vote on the Waqf Bill exposed the differences within the Biju Janata Dal (BJD) as well as the 
divergence between prospective allies, the BJP and the AIADMK. The BJD's decision not to issue a 
whip riled many within the party, more so considering BJD patriarch Naveen Patnaik's clear stance 
against the Waqf Bill. One of the reasons for the AIADMK-BJP split in 2023, was the regional party's fear 
of losing its minority voter base. The AIADMK voted against the Waqf Bill, underscoring its reservations 
about the BJP's agenda. While the YSRCP, the AIADMK and the BJD showed an eagerness to keep a 
distance from the BJP, the JD(U) and the TDP ended up in an embrace of their dominant ally. The 
merits of the Waqf amendments may be debatable but the government's refusal to take the Muslim 
community into confidence on an important piece of legislation is a classic sign of majoritarianism. 
Barring a nominated member in the upper House, no Muslim MP supported the amendments. The Waqf 
debate also highlighted the fact that the ruling alliance does not have a single elected member from the 
community in Parliament. Beyond the veneer of efficient outcomes, the session sharpened political and 
communal polarisation. Discussions should ideally expand the common ground, but this session failed 
on that count.