Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 62

Equitable distribution: On GST and the Parliament's Public Accounts Committee 
report 
PAC recommendations on GST reforms will resonate with States 
The 19th report of Parliament's Public Accounts Committee (PAC) is appropriately scathing in 
its criticism of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, introduced in July 2017 to simplify, 
unify and improve indirect tax compliance in India. At the outset, the PAC highlights a nearly 
2% drop in indirect tax revenue between FY18 and FY20 - the first two years of GST prior to 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Among the several discrepancies flagged, it is the non-auditing and 
non-finalisation of the States' Compensation Fund for over six years that stands out as 
particularly troubling. This has strained the functioning of what was meant to be a unified yet 
federal tax structure. The PAC notes the Centre's failure to furnish the Compensation Fund Account to 
the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG), a necessary step to certify and release timely compensation 
to States for revenue losses since the rollout of GST. The centralising tendencies of the GST regime 
have long been a point of contention for major revenue-generating States, many of which have raised 
concerns over diminished fiscal autonomy and sharp declines in indirect tax collections. As a 
destination-based tax, GST is levied at the point of consumption, adversely affecting manufacturing-
heavy States. 
To address these concerns, the GST (Compensation to States) Act, 2017, mandated a Compensation 
Fund and promised States a 14% annual revenue growth for five years (2017-22), using FY16 as the 
base year. However, many States have reported either non-receipt of funds or serious delays, which 
they say have negatively impacted governance. The PAC attributes this to the Centre's indifferent 
approach. In one striking example, the PAC cites 2,447 inconsistencies - amounting to ₹32,577.73 
crore - out of a sample of 10,667 cases - and criticises the Finance Ministry's audit approach as 
"lackadaisical". The PAC has recommended establishing a formal mechanism with the CAG to ensure 
timely audits and updates on pending cases. It also calls for a comprehensive review to develop a "GST 
2.0" - a recommendation that is likely to resonate with States demanding a greater share of GST 
revenues, closer to 70%-80%, up from the current 50%.


Lessons from a quake: on the Myanmar earthquake 
escue operations are in full swing following the devastating 7.7-magnitude earthquake 
centred in Myanmar, which, according to official estimates, has claimed more than 1,600 
lives. With the death toll rising from the hundreds to over a thousand in just 24 hours, and 
information continuing to trickle in, a significantly higher casualty count cannot be ruled out. 
The number of injured stands at around 3,400. The damage to infrastructure has been 
massive, with large sections of densely populated cities such as Mandalay and Naypyitaw 
left without electricity. Hospitals are overwhelmed, and people are camping in the streets, 
their homes reduced to rubble. Myanmar's neighbours have responded swiftly, dispatching warships 
and aircraft loaded with relief materials and rescue personnel. India, China, and Thailand (casualties 
were reported after a skyscraper that was under construction in Bangkok collapsed despite being over 
1,000 kilometres from the epicentre) are among the countries that have sent aid. Indian military aircraft 
made multiple sorties into Myanmar over the weekend, ferrying supplies and search-and-rescue crews 
to Naypyitaw, the capital, parts of which were devastated by the quake. Several Chinese rescue teams 
have also arrived, including one that crossed overland from Yunnan province, according to China's 
embassy in Myanmar. 
Myanmar lies in a seismically active region at the convergence of four tectonic plates - the Eurasian, 
Indian, Sunda, and Burma microplate. The constant shifting and collision of these plates are 
responsible for most earthquakes in the region. Quakes of the magnitude witnessed on Friday are not 
uncommon; the Sagaing Fault, which is one of Myanmar's most active, has produced six to eight 
earthquakes of similar intensity since 1900, according to the United States Geological Survey. The 
Myanmar quake brings back memories of the 7.8 magnitude quake in Türkiye and Syria, in 2023, that 
killed at least 55,000. While accurately predicting the timing, location, and intensity of earthquakes 
remains beyond current scientific capability, probabilities can be estimated, and it is possible to 
strengthen existing infrastructure to withstand seismic events. Myanmar's political instability since the 
coup in 2021 has diverted attention from essential governance issues such as enforcing building codes. 
While the current damage is irreversible and recovery will take months, the existing ceasefire offers an 
opportunity to push for political stability. This can foster investment, attract expertise, and ensure better 
regulatory enforcement - critical steps in protecting the country against future disasters.