Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 63

Back door censor: On the government's SAHYOG portal 
SAHYOG must adhere to the safeguards and procedures in Section 69A of the IT 
Act 
y informing the Delhi High Court that it cannot be compelled to come on board the Union 
government's SAHYOG portal, the social media platform, X, has brought to light a 
mechanism that could potentially be misused by the government in its attempts to curb 
content on the Internet. The portal, which has been conceptualised by the government to 
be a platform that will facilitate coordination among law enforcement agencies, social 
media platforms and telecom service providers to help in quicker takedowns of unlawful 
content, seems to be a follow-up to an office memorandum by the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology, in October 2023, authorising government agencies to block content, under 
Section 79 of the IT Act. The creation of SAHYOG was disclosed by the Union Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA) in the Delhi High Court last year, in Shabana vs Govt Of NCT Of Delhi And Ors., where the court 
had emphasised the need for a mechanism to enable real-time interactions between Internet 
intermediaries and law enforcement authorities in order to address urgent cases. Section 79 of the IT 
Act provides safe harbour protection to intermediaries so that they are not liable for third-party content 
hosted or transmitted on or through their platforms provided they adhere to certain conditions. Section 
79(3)(b) provides an exception to this protection - if an intermediary receives actual knowledge or is 
notified by the government agency that certain content is being used to commit an unlawful act, it must 
remove or disable access to that content quickly, failing which it will lose safe harbour protection. 
By using Section 79(3)(b) to enable the creation of what is a content takedown portal, the government 
- as X rightly claims in its petition - bypasses the limited safeguards under Section 69A of the IT Act, 
which allows content blocking only on specific grounds such as national security and public order, and 
mandates procedural safeguards such as a designated officer's approval, written justification and 
independent review of any such blocking request. X's claim also justifiably raises the possibility of 
SAHYOG being used as a tool for unchecked censorship as it will allow for multiple government 
agencies including Ministries, State governments and local police to have blocking powers unlike the 
provisions in Section 69A. If SAHYOG is used as the medium to address blocking orders, there seem to 
be no opportunities for challenging the order, nor are there any procedural protections that are 
otherwise available through Section 69A. This suggests that the implementation of the portal could be 
ultra vires and violates the Supreme Court's judgment in Shreya Singhal vs Union of India. While the 
Delhi and Karnataka High Courts (X has also filed a petition challenging SAHYOG here) hear the cases, 
the MHA must provide the full details of the features of the SAHYOG portal for public perusal to ensure 
that it does not bypass the legal frameworks for online content regulation.


Republican journey: on the President's address to the nation 
The President should stay clear of partisan political discourse 
In her customary address to the nation on the eve of the 76th Republic Day, the President of India, 
Droupadi Murmu, said that the Constitution has become a living document due to the millennia-old 
civic virtues of the country. Ms. Murmu also paid tribute to Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, who chaired the 
Drafting Committee, and other members of the Constituent Assembly, who created a document that 
would guide the country's progress. Connecting India's journey as a modern Republic to its heritage, the 
President said the constitutional values of justice, liberty, equality, and fraternity have always been a 
part of India's civilization. Sceptics who doubted India's prospects at the time of Independence have 
been proven wrong due to these inherent strengths of the country. The President highlighted the 
representative character of the Constituent Assembly, whose members were drawn from every part of, 
and communities in, the country, including 15 women. While women's equality was at that time only a 
distant ideal in much of the world, Indian women were contributing to shaping the nation's destiny, she 
noted. Reflecting on the progress over 75 years, Ms. Murmu commended the Union government's efforts 
to move past the relics of the colonial era, particularly the "audacity of vision" of replacing colonial-era 
criminal laws with three new laws rooted in Indian traditions of jurisprudence. 
The President strongly advocated the controversial proposal for simultaneous elections to the Lok Sabha 
and State Assemblies as a means to redefine good governance. The draft Bill on simultaneous 
elections, introduced by the Narendra Modi government, is under review by a joint committee of 
Parliament. The President waded into the debate with the argument that synchronized elections would 
promote consistency in governance, prevent policy paralysis, mitigate resource diversion, and reduce 
financial burdens. It is a contentious topic and Opposition parties that are a part of the Indian National 
Developmental Inclusive Alliance have opposed the plan on the ground that it violates the basic structure 
of the Constitution and undermines federalism. Not surprisingly, Congress President Mallikarjun Kharge 
has alleged that there is a "tendency" to impose a "One Nation, One Party" agenda by undermining 
the Opposition. The President could have stayed clear of this topic. The government will need to tread 
carefully to ensure that the First Citizen is not drawn into what is essentially a partisan political debate. 
I

            Unity without uniformity is key to a more perfect union. And Republic Day is as good as any other day to 
reiterate that.