Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 13

Passing the Big Buck, It Runs in the Family 
Family offices represent patient capital 
amily offices now manage a sizable slice of global capital with the principal objective of 
preserving wealth during the biggest intergenerational transfer in history. Their scale and pace of 
growth are creating an ecosystem, while the institution is adapting to emerging social, ecological 
and philanthropic needs. Governments are proactive in facilitating this transformation to the 
advantage of public welfare. Technology is another disruptor, both in terms of how family offices manage 
themselves, as well as how the money they manage is directed into investments. The investment horizon 
of family offices complicates the job of deploying capital efficiently. Economic frontiers will have shifted 
by the time inheritors come into their money. This blurs the boundary between personal wealth and 
venture capital-chasing entrepreneurship. The current generation of entrepreneurs is, in effect, using its 
wealth to seek out the next generation of entrepreneurs. Private equity fulfils this role, but operates in a 
more regulated environment. Family office assets are set to overtake those of hedge funds. However, 
they must create an alternative ecosystem that builds a defensive moat. Private wealth, by its nature, is 
free to operate in the shadows. But it has to emerge into the light if it needs to grow. Naturally, the 
financial world chases family offices assiduously, which have set out the terms of engagement. 
Family offices represent patient capital and can inject an element of stability into private equity. Natural 
selection is, therefore, driving intergenerational wealth towards alternative investments and newer 
geographies. More of it will occur once the wealth transitions to the next generation, which will have its 
own perspectives on investment strategy. Family offices would have strengthened their governance and 
management by the time a substantial part of the wealth is transferred. This particular mechanism for 
capital allocation has a lot going for it.


Damning silence: On India's Pegasus probe 
U.S. ruling gives fresh cause to reopen India's stalled Pegasus probe 
U.S. court's decision holding an Israeli company liable for surreptitiously installing Pegasus, a 
spyware suite, on the phones of targeted individuals through WhatsApp, has brought the focus 
back on the Centre's questionable inaction when such surveillance allegations surfaced in 
India in 2021. The U.S. District Court for Northern District of California ruled that NSO Group 
Technologies violated both federal and State laws against computer fraud and abuse. WhatsApp sued 
the NSO Group in October 2019, alleging that its system was used by the Israeli company to plant 
malware on approximately 1,400 mobile phones and devices for surveilling their users. In a summary 
judgment, the court agreed with WhatsApp that its application had been reverse-engineered or 
'decompiled' to create a modified version called 'WhatsApp Installation Server' or WIS. In the backdrop 
of this ruling, the question that arises in India is about the fate of reports submitted by a court-appointed 
expert committee in 2022 to the Supreme Court of India. The then Chief Justice of India (CJI), N.V. 
Ramana, had read out a few paragraphs from the report of the panel's overseeing judge, Justice (retired) 
R.V. Raveendran. The report said the Technical Committee found no conclusive evidence on the 
presence of Pegasus, but there was some kind of malware in five out of the 29 phones examined. The 
reports are yet to be made public. 
Even if there was no effective hearing or follow-up action, what cannot be forgotten is that CJI Ramana 
had observed in open court that the government did not cooperate with the committee's investigation. It 
was conduct typical of the Modi regime, which has repeatedly demonstrated that silence, denial and 
obfuscation form its stock responses whenever allegations emerge. It showed no interest in probing 
disclosures that the phones of journalists, activists, doctors and court staff were targets of spyware. It 
made a strange claim that the country had such ironclad laws that illegal surveillance was not possible. It 
adopted the untenable position that acknowledging that its agencies possessed any particular software 
would jeopardise national security. All this, despite admitting in Parliament that it was aware of some 
users being targeted by Pegasus through WhatsApp. It did not respond to credible reports that Pegasus 
may have been used to plant evidence on computers to frame dissidents. In the light of a judicial 
decision, albeit an overseas one, that the NSO Group is liable for the use of its spyware by its clients, 
solely government entities, the time has come for sealed reports to be opened and deeper probes 
A 

            begun. The government should come clean on whether it possesses surveillance software. Otherwise, 
citizens will be rendered even more vulnerable to illegal surveillance.