Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 42

Missing the target: On the economy, the Centre's growth target 
Despite missing the growth target, the economy remains strong 
India's industrial production growth slowed to a six-month low in February to 2.9%, down from 
January's 5.2% (revised estimates) and almost halved from last February's 5.6%. This decline was 
broad-based, except for a marginal rise in power production of 3.6%, up from January's 3.4%, but 
less than half of last February's 7.6%. While mining witnessed the steepest decline to 1.6% this 
February, from 8.1% last year, manufacturing almost halved to 2.9%, from 4.9% last year. From a 
use-based classification, the steep decline in consumer durables output to 3.8%, from 12.6% last 
February as well as a production contraction for the third month in a row, of consumer non-durables by 
2.1% (there was a 3.2% contraction in January), indicates a marked decline in overall consumption 
demand. This has been despite a sharp dip in retail inflation, which was down to 3.61% this February 
from 5.09% a year ago, with a low food inflation rate at 3.75%, the lowest in two years. This makes it 
almost certain that the government's wish for a Maha Kumbh-led spike in consumption has not 
materialized, leading to the likelihood of the Centre's 6.5% GDP growth target for the 2025 fiscal being 
missed. February's Index of Industrial Production (IIP) numbers co-relate with the 14-month low in the 
manufacturing Purchasing Manager's Index survey conducted by S&P at 56.3. 
This highlights two things: the trepidation of manufacturers facing unprecedented global economic 
uncertainty following U.S. President Donald Trump's actions and the lack of an appetite among 
consumers, many of whom have witnessed the value of their assets plummet due to Indian stock market 
volatility that has mirrored the peaks and troughs in global exchanges. There have been green shoots, 
however. Within the manufacturing sector, which has the highest weightage of about 77% in the IIP, 14 
of 23 industry groups recorded growth this February from a year ago. Growth was led by motor vehicles, 
trailers and semi-trailers (8.9%), non-metallic mineral products (8%) and basic metals (5.8%). Capital 
goods output accelerated to 8.2% from 1.7% last year, indicating robust investment demand aided by a 
massive rise in government spending. This was despite the liquidity squeeze in India's banking system 
by ₹1.7 trillion, as on February 20, due to the massive flight of foreign capital in search of haven asset 
classes and to hedge against a depreciating rupee. The central bank stepped in by injecting about ₹2.18 
trillion into the banking system using rupee/dollar swap arrangements that ended on March 24. The 
Centre can perhaps take solace in the fact that despite a possibility of its growth target for the last fiscal 
being missed, India remains the fastest growing economy. 
I


Saving traditional varieties of seeds 
At a time when extreme weather events are threatening food production, we are sidelining 
the very varieties that can withstand droughts, floods, and replenish depleted soils 
Imagine an India where every farmer grows the same handful of crops - wheat, rice, and a few 
vegetables - while thousands of traditional seed varieties disappear. This is not a distant future; it 
is happening now. For centuries, India's seeds of traditional varieties have been the backbone for 
food security and a key component of the country's rich cultural heritage. While new hybrid 
varieties have held the promise of high yields, they have come with a cost - greater dependence 
on chemical fertilizers, water-dependant farming, increased vulnerability to climate shocks, and altered 
food quality and nutrient content. The irony? At a time when extreme weather events are threatening 
food production, we are sidelining the very varieties that can withstand droughts, floods, and replenish 
depleted soils. 
Even when we know their benefits, why are traditional varieties disappearing? The truth is: the problem 
is not just about seeds of traditional varieties; it is about how the entire food system is structured, 
creating issues that make it hard, if not impossible, for traditional seeds to survive. The first issue is of 
market demand and consumer preferences. Most Indian consumers unknowingly contribute to the loss of 
traditional seeds. Supermarkets, government food programmes, and households favour high-yielding 
rice and wheat, sidelining traditional, climate-resilient grains of millets, pulses and indigenous rice 
varieties. As there is no demand, farmers hesitate to grow these varieties. The second issue is that 
unlike hybrid seeds that are mass-produced and sold commercially, traditional seeds rely on community 
exchange and local conservation. However, India lacks enough well-funded community seed banks to 
store and conserve these varieties. Third, India's agricultural policies have historically promoted high-
yielding varieties, in a well-meaning attempt to prioritise food production and boost food security. 
However, this has inadvertently caused a trade-off in terms of biodiversity and nutritional quality. While 
initiatives such as the Odisha Millet Mission have attempted to change this, most government subsidies 
and procurement programmes are slow to catch up. Even agricultural research and development has 
focused more on increasing productivity of a few crops, rather than focusing on conserving and 
improving genetic diversity and enhancing climate resilience. While challenges persist, the fight to save 
India's traditional seed varieties is not lost. Many organizations have been leading the way in conserving 
and reviving indigenous varieties and neglected crops for over 30 years. For instance, MSSRF's Tribal 
Agrobiodiversity Centre in Jeypore, Odisha, recently held a national consultation, which brought together 
different stakeholders and fostered discussion on how to build climate resilient, sustainable, and 
I

            inclusive seed systems. From this consultation, a road map started to emerge on the way forward. No 
single solution will work to save India's seeds of traditional varieties and crops - recognizing farmers' 
knowledge and rights, strengthening community seed bank networks, initiating alternative seed systems 
to support local crops and varieties, providing market incentives, and promoting policy changes are all 
actions that must go hand in hand.