Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 86

Connecting bridge: On the Chenab Rail Bridge 
The rail link will bring Kashmir closer to the rest of India 
'Kashmir to Kanniyakumari' is a figurative expression to denote the geographical expanse of India, from 
its northernmost point to its southern tip, and for the first time in history these are connected by rail. With 
the inauguration of the 272-kilometre Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla Rail Link (USBRL) project which 
has been 28 years in the making, the Kashmir Valley has been connected to the national rail network. 
The tough, unsurmountable topography of the Himalayas challenged the engineering capabilities of the 
Indian Railways, but it has come out with flying colours. The engineering marvel, the Chenab Rail Bridge, 
that stands 35 metres higher than the Eiffel Tower, is the world's highest railway arch bridge at 359 
metres above the riverbed. Spanning 1,315 m, it will endure wind speeds of up to 260 km per hour and 
has been built to last 120 years. Nearby, the Anji Khad Bridge, rises boldly across the rugged terrain as 
India's first cable-stayed railway bridge. Towering 331 m above the riverbed and stretching 725 m 
across, it is anchored by 96 high-tensile cables; 8,200 metric tonnes of structural steel went into its 
construction. Built at a cost of ₹43,780 crore, the USBRL link witnessed drilling of mountains to set up 36 
tunnels that span 119 kilometres and 943 bridges through ridges and mountain passes. 
Kashmir's decades of geographical isolation have finally come to an end. The Vande Bharat Express 
between Srinagar in the Kashmir region and Katra in the Jammu region, which was also flagged off by 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi, cuts the surface journey to three hours between the two points. Later this 
year, a scheduled direct train service between the national capital New Delhi and Srinagar will allow 
commuters to touch base in just 13 hours compared to over 24 hours in the past. The Vande Bharat 
Express, a long-distance high-speed service, is bound to end the psychological barriers, multiply the 
development dividend and act as a game changer for the economy of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K). The 
train service has brought renewed hope to the region not long after the Pahalgam terror attack in April 
2025 pushed India and Pakistan to a short conflict. India's 'Operation Sindoor', against terror 
infrastructure across the border, saw Pakistan ending the ceasefire agreement and targeting civilians, 
leaving 18 dead and over 1,500 houses damaged. While inaugurating the train service in Katra, Mr. Modi 
rightly described the rail link as "a symbol of a new, empowered J&K". The bridge will go a long way to 
bring the people of Kashmir closer to the rest of India.


Easing prices: on the inflation data 
Inflation is falling, but the unpredictability factor is high now 
The inflation data for May show just how much can change in one month. Retail inflation came 
in at a 75-month low of 2.8% in May, with easing food prices the main reason behind this fall. 
Wholesale inflation, too, slowed to just 0.4%, the lowest in more than a year. The primary 
driver here, apart from falling food prices, was a drastic contraction of 12.4% in crude oil and 
natural gas prices. An oversupply of oil and a slowing global economy had meant that the 
months leading up to May had seen oil prices fall considerably. With India importing about 80% of its oil 
requirement, this eventually translated into lower wholesale inflation in the country. The Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) had, in its monetary policy announcement on June 11, predicted that inflation for the year 
would come in at an average of 3.7%, down from its forecast of 4% in April. According to some analysts, 
retail inflation in June could come in as low as 2% - the lower end of the RBI's comfort band since 
current factors impact the data with a considerable lag. Overall, the feeling until not too long ago was that 
inflation would continue to ease. But then Israel attacked Iran, and the monsoon's progress across the 
country slowed, both developments that are likely to affect the two key factors, fuel and food, that had, 
until now, led to the fall in overall inflation. 
Oil prices jumped as much as 8% in a single day following Israel's attack on Iran on June 13. The Hindu 
had, last week, reported that an escalation of tensions between the two countries and a resultant 
blockage of the vital Strait of Hormuz could result in a 40%-50% increase in shipping costs for Indian 
exports and imports, and could impact India's oil supplies from key sources such as Iraq, Saudi Arabia 
and the United Arab Emirates. This is not an unlikely eventuality, either, with Commerce Ministry officials 
set to hold a meeting this week with trade and shipping sector stakeholders to discuss how the 
government can ease their distress. Costlier inputs, especially oil, will eventually move the inflation 
needle back up. The monsoon has picked up pace again, according to India Meteorological Department 
officials, but it's still early days. In the past, even though the overall monsoon has been satisfactory, its 
uneven spatial distribution has left several agricultural areas parched. It is far from certain that food 
prices will continue their downward trajectory. In its last monetary policy meeting, the RBI shifted its 
stance to 'neutral', indicating that it was as ready to raise interest rates as it was to cut them. This was 
prescient, as the last few weeks have shown just how nimble monetary policy has to be in these 
increasingly unpredictable times. 
T