Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 38

Pension woes: on EPFO member-pensioners 
The Centre must bring in transparency in scrutiny of pension claims 
The Standing Committee of Parliamentarians on Labour, Textiles and Skill Development, in its 
report on the 2025-26 demands for grants to the Union Ministry of Labour and Employment, 
has rightly reiterated the urgent need to revise the minimum monthly pension of ₹1,000 for 
member-pensioners under the Employees' Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO). This 
amount, fixed in August 2014 under the Employees' Pension Scheme (EPS) of 1995, has 
remained unchanged for over a decade. Ironically, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led government 
continues to take credit for the pension hike in 2014, though it merely implemented a decision 
announced earlier by the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) regime. Back in 2014, when 
the UPA proposed the ₹1,000 minimum pension, the BJP, which was in the Opposition, criticized the 
move as insufficient. Its senior leader, Prakash Javadekar, called it a "pittance" and demanded a hike to 
at least ₹3,000. 
At present, the government allocates an average of ₹980 crore annually for minimum pension payments. 
This figure needs to be tripled in order to make it a meaningful increase. Additionally, the Centre 
contributes 1.16% of wages (capped at a ₹15,000 monthly wage ceiling) towards the EPS corpus - an 
amount revised to ₹9,250 crore for 2024-25 and expected to cross ₹10,000 crore in 2025-26. The 
government's argument is that it cannot afford a further financial burden, but feasible suggestions to 
manage the additional expenditure have been submitted to the Labour and Finance Ministries and the 
EPFO. Equally concerning is the EPFO's handling of applications from those opting for pensions based 
on higher wages. Many applicants, now receiving demand notices requiring contributions amounting to 
several lakhs of rupees, have been left in the dark about their entitled pension amounts and arrears. In 
several cases, applicants have had to rely on their online accounts to track updates, as the EPFO has 
failed to issue any official communication. Instead of providing clarity, applicants are expected to 
calculate their expected pension through a portal-based calculator that comes with a disclaimer and no 
assurance of accuracy. The situation is worse for member-pensioners from exempted establishments, 
where authorities have summarily rejected applications for higher pension and even stopped previously 
sanctioned higher pensions without proper explanation. The Union government must initiate 
comprehensive stakeholder consultations, take steps to increase the monthly pension and ensure the 
fair treatment of all member-pensioners. 
T


A welcome move: On Wikipedia and Supreme Court order 
Arbitrary takedown orders on Wikipedia will stifle free flow of information 
The Supreme Court, in quashing the Delhi High Court's orders against Wikimedia to take 
down a Wikipedia page on the basis of a defamation case filed by the news agency, Asian 
News International (ANI), has set right an error by the High Court. A High Court judgment, 
passed on April 2, 2025, allowed the taking down of the Wikipedia page by saying that the 
statements were defamatory and were not a verbatim reproduction of the text in the 
references that it quoted; that the references were themselves "editorials" or "opinionated 
articles" and that being an encyclopaedia, Wikipedia carried a "higher responsibility". The 
reasoning is problematic as the references are based on long form reporting and quotes from 
independent investigators, and are not "opinions" or "editorials" as the High Court made them out to be. 
The Court has clearly differed with the High Court's reasoning by observing that the takedown order was 
based on too wide a prayer, and noted that the directions to remove all false, misleading and 
defamatory content were too broadly worded. The Bench has now directed the news agency to make a 
fresh plea to the High Court pointing out specific portions to be removed from the webpage. The fact that 
Wikipedia is an Internet intermediary which enjoys safe harbour provisions as the content creation and 
moderation are handled by users of its site should suggest that any wide-ranging takedown order could 
punish the very model on which the encyclopaedia operates. 
Wikipedia is a community-driven encyclopaedia freely available on the Internet and is maintained by 
volunteers across the world. Even if the quality of articles is not uniform, their editors generally include 
experts and Wikipedia allows users to edit the content provided they stick to site guidelines. Disputes on 
content leading to "editing wars" are generally resolved by discussions on the page and measures such 
as placing the page on "extended confirmed protection" or "full protection", allowing only "extended 
confirmed users" for the former and administrators for the latter to make changes. These users are not 
selected by Wikimedia but elected by community members based on their prior editing activity and 
reputation. These processes have ensured a significant degree of reliability on the encyclopaedia, even 
as it has become a repository of more than 62.95 million articles in over 350 languages. In asking for 
the takedown of articles by interpreting critical information as defamation and by even threatening penal 
action against Wikipedia, judicial actions could unwittingly lead to the stifling of open discussion of 
entities on the encyclopaedia, thereby acting against the interest of the free flow of information.