Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 39

Home and abroad: On India and the Indian student 
India must improve research infrastructure to serve its students 
The ongoing Programme of revoking the visas of foreign students in the U.S., ostensibly for 
opposing the country's foreign policy, is a direct outcome of the xenophobic tendency in the 
Trump administration. The danger is that the 'Make America Great Again' movement that 
propelled Donald Trump into the Presidency may soon permeate deep into campus life too. In 
any case, the number of Indian students enrolling in U.S. universities has been on a 
downward trend since last year - even before the drumbeats of hostility started. Indian 
students are already finding other countries such as Germany attractive for lower costs and 
greater flexibility to self-fund their education through work. Enrolment figures for September this year will 
demonstrate how attractive the U.S. still is for Indian students despite the looming cancellation of the 
Optional Practical Training Programme that offered a segue for foreign students to working in the U.S. 
All this, together with the defunding of research and arm-twisting of universities in a country known to 
value academic freedom, has indeed lowered, if not upended, the regard that people outside had for the 
U.S. 
Many countries have sought to leverage the decline of the U.S. as a destination for talent. Reports talk 
about European institutions welcoming disgruntled U.S.-based researchers, ironically noting that 
scientists and researchers fleeing persecution greatly contributed to American progress in the past. For a 
while now, Indian returnees have been driven in-part towards a desire to come back home or even 
serve their motherland. Professional achievement or the opportunity to do high-end research has not 
always been a big driver towards India attracting back its people. While, outwardly, new vistas have 
opened, research opportunities have expanded, and the fight for funds is less intense, in part due to the 
encouragement given to private institutions, much work remains to be done. Loosening up the 
government's purse strings and goading private institutions to invest in research more may only be the 
starting point. What often puts off returnees is the daily struggle in India. The struggle not only 
characterizes everyday social life but also the workplace. Collaboration between institutions or even 
across departments is a tough sell. The suffocating social norms and hierarchies are a downer. Lastly, 
the academic freedom that Indians are used to enjoying elsewhere will need to be recreated. That 
would require a complete overhaul in the Indian government's attitude to liberal values and towards 
foreigners, which often borders on the Trumpian.


Dire efforts: On de-extinction and conservation 
The conservation argument for resurrecting dire wolves is not credible 
olossal Biosciences is an American company with an unusual marketing line: combining 
genomics with conservation - not in its traditional form, but through de-extinction, which is 
resurrecting species extinct for thousands of years. Leading this project is Harvard geneticist 
George Church, a prominent promoter of the company, who aims to bring back the woolly 
mammoth, a distant ancestor of the elephant. The stated logic is to combat global warming. 
During the Pleistocene Ice Ages, the mammoth roamed lush grasslands across the tundra. Until its 
extinction around 5,000 years ago, the Arctic tundra also supported large populations of bison, wolves, 
cave lions, and giant deer. As the climate warmed, these species_______, and the grasslands gave way 
to shrubbery and sheets of snow. As temperatures rise, permafrost begins to disappear, resulting in high 
emissions of methane, a more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide. To prevent this, some 
scientists at a Siberian Park have been transporting large animals that are resistant to cold to see if their 
foraging can restore the grasslands. Grass absorbs less heat than the tall trees in a shrub forest - the 
dominant species - and therefore decelerates warming, but it cannot stop warming. 
The woolly mammoth, though extinct, is seen as a potent weapon in this climate plan. Scientists at 
Colossal have extracted fragments of its DNA from fossils and reconstructed its genome. By comparing it 
to that of the modern elephant, they have edited specific genes to recreate mammoth-like traits, with the 
goal of eventually incubating a hybrid embryo in an elephant's womb. Scientists have also experimented 
with the dire wolf, an extinct relative of the gray wolf, and birthed three snow-white wolves. However, this 
claim has yet to pass rigorous peer review. Critics point out that only 20 genes were edited, and what 
has been created is, in essence, a "strange-looking gray wolf". Despite such criticisms, the technological 
achievement is a testament to the ability to engineer precision edits to the genome. The work of Chinese 
scientist He Jiankui, who claimed to have produced gene-edited human babies, remains controversial. 
Colossal may be credited for its genomics work, but the claim that it is reviving species for conservation 
is not credible. Thousands of living species are vanishing due to habitat loss and human encroachment. 
Spending millions of dollars on speculative projects, whose benefits, if there are any, will fructify only 
over centuries, takes away resources from immediate conservation efforts. The scientific community 
must lay down strict guidelines on the use of gene-editing technology in applications other than health.