Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 93

Batting for prevention: On Nipah cases in Kerala 
A One Health programme is essential to prevent zoonotic spillover 
ith two cases of Nipah virus detected in Kerala - including one fatality owing to the 
infection - the attention is rightfully, once again, on a preventable infectious disease 
that could leave havoc in its trail. An adolescent girl from Malappuram succumbed 
to the virus on July 1, and a 38-year-old woman from Palakkad is battling for life in 
the hospital. In the big picture, as many as 425 people who are in the contact lists of 
the two Nipah-infected persons in three districts in Kerala have been identified and are under 
surveillance. Of these, 228 are from Malappuram district, where Patient Zero was identified this time, 
110 in Palakkad and 87 in Kozhikode. In Palakkad, one contact is being treated in isolation, while 12 
people are currently undergoing treatment in Malappuram - five of them are in the intensive care unit. 
One of them tested negative for the infection, and the results for the others are awaited. Over 140 of 
those on the contact list are said to be health workers. While the health machinery in Kerala is engaged 
in tracing the original source of the infection, it is also tasked, particularly in the three districts of 
Malappuram, Palakkad and Kozhikode, to trace contacts, isolate them to prevent further spread, contain 
infection and treat all those who show symptoms. India has recorded several outbreaks of the virus 
since 2001, a year when 45 of the 66 people infected died in West Bengal. In 2018, it surged in Kerala, 
with 17 of the 19 cases with laboratory-confirmed Nipah infection dying without responding to treatment. 
Kerala continues to report outbreaks regularly since then. 
What renders even a single case of significant concern to get the entire health-care machinery in a 
tizzy? Nipah is a transmissible viral infection with a high mortality rate, ranging between 40% and 
75%, which implies that if the infection spreads, then, a number of people are likely to die. Future 
research might add an effective tool to the armamentarium to effectively treat Nipah infections without 
mortality, but as of now, the course of action is vested only in prevention and awareness generation. 
Nipah is transmitted by fruit bats which are the natural reservoirs of the virus. It is suspected that 
consuming contaminated fruits, bitten or licked by bats, may play a role in spreading the virus. It is also 
equally important to cast a watchful eye on climate change-related factors, particularly anthropogenic 
activity that is destroying natural habitats, and initiate a robust One Health programme that will weigh 
not just Nipah but also other pathogens that are capable of zoonotic spillover, transitioning from 
animals to humans and causing great harm. 
W


Building resilience: On the 17th Summit of BRICS emerging economies 
The Rio declaration underlined the cohesion within BRICS 
The 17th Summit of BRICS emerging economies, which ended on Monday (July 7, 2025) 
came at a time when the organisation was in the global spotlight. This was the first such 
meeting that included all the newly inducted members (Egypt, Ethiopia, the UAE, Iran and 
Indonesia; Saudi Arabia has not joined so far). It also followed the U.S.-Israel attacks on Iran's 
nuclear programme, and the escalation in Israel's bombardment of Gaza. This was the first 
summit since the four-day India-Pakistan conflict in May. and also after the G-7 summit in Canada. The 
BRICS grouping, seen as the next challenger to the global financial order, is in U.S. President Donald 
Trump's cross-hairs, as he sees it mounting an alternative to the dollar in international trade. In addition, 
the group has several internal rivalries that have brought its sustainability into question. In April, the 
BRICS Foreign Ministers' meeting ended without a joint statement, as the African members held up the 
wording on the expansion of the UN Security Council. Meanwhile, despite India's clarification in March 
that it is not considering de-dollarization of trade in any form, and that there is no "unified BRICS 
position" on the issue, Brazil's President Lula da Silva doubled down on rhetoric against the U.S., 
saying that BRICS proves the world "doesn't need an emperor". Mr. Trump has since repeated threats 
that BRICS countries would face an extra 10% tariffs due to the grouping's "anti-American stance" - 
an awkward moment for New Delhi as it attempts to conclude a trade agreement with Washington. 
Despite all the challenges, the Rio declaration underlined the basic cohesion and consensus within 
BRICS members on a range of issues. In the joint statement, there was strong language against the 
attacks on Gaza and condemnation of the strikes on Iran, given the risks to nuclear safety. India was 
able to ensure a paragraph with tough language condemning the Pahalgam terror attack and references 
to terror financing and "cross-border movement of terrorists". India and Brazil won endorsements of the 
whole grouping on playing a larger role at the UN, "including the Security Council". The absence of the 
Chinese and Russian Presidents allowed more space for the non-P5 countries to promote a common 
vision for the Global South, adding several important resolutions on energy security, climate change 
and re-ordering the WTO. The Rio declaration also took a stern view of the U.S.'s moves on tariffs. As 
India prepares for its leadership of the BRICS grouping next year, that now represents about half the 
global population, around 40% of the global GDP and a quarter of global trade, it can move forward with 
this consensus, fulfilling the vision for the grouping's acronym that Mr. Modi recast as "Building 
Resilience and Innovation for Cooperation and Sustainability". 
T