Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 57

A bad omen for public trust in vaccines 
Multiple vaccine-related petitions that have been filed before courts reflect growing 
concerns about how vaccines are approved and administered in India 
ver the last few years, multiple petitions have been filed before the courts regarding 
vaccines. While most of them pertain to COVID-19 vaccines, two of them pertain to a 
rabies vaccine and a rotavirus vaccine. While not all these petitions have been admitted by 
the courts, they reflect growing concerns related to how vaccines are approved and 
administered in India. It would be a mistake to dismiss these petitions as part of the larger 
'anti-vax' movement, which is fuelled primarily by conspiracy theories. One of these 
petitions was filed by a group in Kerala before the Supreme Court. The group complained 
about deaths caused due to the alleged failure of anti-rabies vaccine. Other petitions raise questions 
about transparency of clinical trial data, inadequate disclosure of the side-effects of vaccines, the 
monitoring of vaccine-related adverse events, and compensation in cases where vaccines may have 
caused deaths or serious adverse events. Trust in the regulator appears to be abysmal since the 
petitioners in the cases pertaining to the rabies vaccine and COVID-19 vaccines have requested courts 
to form independent committees to re-evaluate clinical trial data submitted by the vaccine manufacturers 
to the regulator. Courts are poorly placed to decide such issues. If history is any indicator, these cases 
will drag on for years before poorly reasoned orders with unsatisfactory conclusions are provided. To 
complicate matters, vaccine manufacturers such as Serum Institute and Bharat Biotech have gone on 
a spree filing defamation lawsuits against those questioning or criticising their vaccines. Some courts 
have granted these companies ex-parte interim injunctions. These responses are not good for public 
health or the credibility of India's vaccine manufacturers. It is time for policymakers in the Ministry of 
Health to tackle some of these issues through policy deliberations instead of litigation. The trigger for 
many of these petitions has been the opacity with which vaccines were approved by the drugs 
regulator, the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO). There are two issues on the 
transparency front. The first is that the CDSCO makes key regulatory decisions along with "independent" 
doctors, but their details are not disclosed. Disclosing the names of the people and their potential 
conflicts of interest along with a transcript of their deliberations during the approval process is a bare 
minimum to build public confidence in the process. The second issue is regarding the clinical trial data 
which forms the basis of the approval process. Typically, pharmaceutical companies conduct clinical 
trials and submit data to the regulator. As of now, the CDSCO does not release any information it 
evaluates prior to granting regulatory approval. This needs to change. The CDSCO should publicly 
disclose all raw clinical trial data and its own internal analysis, subject to redactions to protect patient 
privacy. The other issue raised in one of the COVID-related petitions is the disclosure required to be 
made to citizens about the possible side-effects of a vaccine, without which there cannot be informed 
consent. It is not enough for the government to disclose such information on some obscure website. It 
needs to be made in a format which is understandable to citizens at the time of vaccination so as to 
enable them to make an informed decision. Indian law does not spell out a framework for 'informed 
consent' outside the context of clinical trials. A related issue here is putting in place a transparent 
pharmacovigilance system which collects data on adverse events due to vaccination, known as an 
'adverse event following immunization' (AEFI). India has ad-hoc guidelines in place, but these lack the 
force of a parliamentary law and do not appear to be implemented well. A well-functioning AEFI system 
will go a long way in collecting data of high quality that pharmaceutical companies cannot __________.


High base effect: On a shrinking trade deficit, rising exports 
A shrinking trade deficit, as seen in February, is no cause for cheer 
India's goods trade in February saw its steepest decline in nearly two years. Exports fell by 10.9% 
to $36.91 billion, while imports dropped 16.3% to $50.96 billion, resulting in the smallest trade 
deficit in over three years (42 months) at $14 billion. While a shrinking trade deficit driven by rising 
exports would have been a positive development, the simultaneous decline in exports and imports 
is a cause for concern. Experts partly attribute this narrowing deficit to a high base effect, as 
exports in February last year, a leap year, stood at $41.4 billion and imports at $60.92 billion. 
However, exporters also report a trend of American importers holding back on orders, fearing the 
reciprocal tariffs set to take effect on April 2, as announced by U.S. President Donald Trump on 
February 13. This announcement came just before his meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi, 
where they unveiled an ambitious plan to boost bilateral trade to $500 billion by 2030 and finalize a free 
trade agreement (BTA) in the months ahead. Despite Commerce Minister Piyush Goyal's diplomatic 
outreach to U.S. Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick this month, discussions yielded little beyond a 
commitment to continue BTA negotiations. The looming threat of reciprocal tariffs has unsettled Indian 
exporters, as the U.S. is India's second-largest trading partner, accounting for $118.3 billion in trade last 
fiscal year. It is also the only country among India's top five trading partners with which India enjoys a 
trade surplus. 
Imports also declined sharply, led by a 62% plunge in gold imports compared to last February. This drop 
is linked to domestic gold prices surging to ₹87,886 per 10 grams last week, dampening consumer 
demand. Oil imports also fell nearly 30% as India diversified its supply sources in response to additional 
U.S. sanctions on Russian oil producers and tankers in early January. By mid-2023, Russia accounted 
for over 40% of India's crude imports, a significant increase from less than 1% before western sanctions 
on Moscow following its 2022 invasion of Ukraine. If Washington moves to ___________its trade deficit 
with New Delhi, India could face a 15% widening in its overall trade deficit, based on last fiscal year's 
$241 billion shortfall. India must diversify its goods and services trade to reduce its heavy reliance on the 
U.S. Two potential markets are China and the U.K. While imports from China have contributed to about a 
third of India's trade deficit for over five years, India's trade imbalance with the U.K. accounted for less 
than 3% of its total deficit last fiscal year. The free trade agreement negotiations with the U.K. are an 
opportunity for India to shift this balance in its favour.