Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 70

Sent messages: On Jammu and Kashmir post Pahalgam terror attack 
New Delhi must act in concert with Srinagar to isolate terrorists 
In the aftermath of the gruesome terror incident in Pahalgam, India must hear clearly the message 
emanating from those who committed the heinous crimes. By targeting tourists by religion and 
killing them in cold blood, the terrorists have sought to undermine India's plurality and what the 
country stands for. By killing a local Kashmiri who tried to help the hapless tourists, and by 
targeting people in a popular location that benefits the Kashmiri economy, the attackers have 
grievously harmed the livelihoods of thousands of Kashmiris dependent on tourism. By choosing to 
attack unarmed tourists at a time when the U.S. Vice-President was visiting India, they have also sought 
to undermine the perception that economic activities had returned to normalcy after the tumultuous 
period following the abrogation of special status for Jammu and Kashmir. The tragic by-product of the 
killings is now fear of the possibility that such attacks on tourists may recur, and of the economic pain 
that this would cause ordinary Kashmiris. New Delhi's and Srinagar's responses must keep these in 
mind and work towards the mitigation of fear and send a clear message - the people of India, including 
Kashmiris, are united against terror. 
Following the attacks, New Delhi has sought to use strong diplomatic measures available in its arsenal 
against Pakistan, as it is well known that such terror attacks are almost always carried out by radicalised 
elements who are trained by Islamabad's covert agencies. As it turns out, the mere absence of 
spectacular violence cannot be termed normalcy. Normalcy is a relative term and it is better experienced 
than announced. While the large-scale violence and militancy that was seen in the 1990s never 
happened despite the unpopularity of these decisions, the uneasy calm was reflected in the sporadic 
incidents of terrorism targeting Kashmiri Pandits, migrants, and security forces in new areas that were 
hitherto bereft of militancy. With significant curbs on political activity, there was little outlet even for 
demands related to governance for the citizenry. The conduct of Lok Sabha elections and the Supreme 
Court-mandated Assembly election process allowed for some expression of voices in the Valley, but it is 
a stretch to say that this was "normalcy". The Union government must work in concert with the Jammu 
and Kashmir government, empower Jammu and Kashmir by restoring Statehood, and assert this 
cohesion to isolate radical and violent elements threatening the livelihoods of Kashmiris and the lives of 
tourists visiting the serene valley. 
I


Acceptable contrast: on the real economy 
A buoyancy in the real economy could provide long-term relief 
hree sets of data - January's industrial production, February's retail inflation and the 
performance of mutual funds in February - present a contrast between India's real economy 
and the financial markets, that is both concerning and heartening. In the real economy, 
February's 3.61% retail inflation is a seven-month low aided by a steady and welcome fall in 
food inflation, which had reached a 15-month high of 10.87% last October. February's food 
inflation, which is a barometer of people's spending on monthly groceries, fell to an almost 
two-year low of 3.75%. This would come as a relief to India's policymakers who had hoped for a spike in 
consumption demand to buttress the government's full year GDP growth target of 6.5% for the 2025 
financial year. February's 3.61% retail inflation is also well within the Reserve Bank of India's (RBI) 
medium-term 4% inflation target, signalling a probable, albeit much-needed, repo rate cut at a time when 
there has been a liquidity squeeze in the domestic financial system due to the worrisome flight of foreign 
investors as they hedge against a depreciating rupee, the U.S.'s proposed tariffs-induced inflation and 
global uncertainties. 
The RBI's February 7 0.25 basis point repo rate cut, from 6.50% to 6.25%, after a gap of five years, 
signaled the central bank's intent to raise capital flows in the real economy, to spur economic activity 
while continuing to focus on inflation moderation. Amid the ₹1.7 trillion liquidity squeeze in the banking 
system due to the flight of foreign portfolio and institutional investors, the RBI conducted two tranches of 
dollar/rupee swap auctions, with another one slated for later this month. This is expected to inject over 
₹2 trillion into the banking system to address long-term liquidity concerns. Despite such ________ in the 
financial system, January's industrial production print at an eight-month high of 5%, up from December's 
3.55%, is another indicator of the resilience in the real economy, as growth was led by an increase in 
the output of primary, intermediate, and infrastructure and construction goods. Meanwhile, the panic 
among retail investors was palpable from the February equity mutual funds (MF) reporting numbers. 
Inflows into MFs plunged 27% with the fourth month of declining stock returns. Retail investors, largely 
from the salaried middle and upper-middle classes, had flocked to the stock markets post COVID-19, but 
fresh Systematic Investment Plans dipped to 44.6 lakh, the lowest in the fiscal year. Therefore, while the 
volatility in the financial markets could be worrisome, but temporary, the buoyancy in the real economy 
makes the hit bearable.