Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 46

Toon trouble: on Vikatan cartoon, I&B Ministry's move 
The power to block content must be used sparingly 
The order of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, directing the removal of a cartoon 
featuring the Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, from a Tamil magazine's website, is unwarranted 
and may not fall under any of the permissible grounds for such removal. Vikatan Plus, an 
online-only magazine published by the Vikatan group, has decided to take legal steps to 
challenge the order. It had earlier defended the content at a hearing before an inter-
departmental committee constituted under the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines 
and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021. The Ministry's move against the cartoon goes against both 
freedom of expression and freedom of the press. The cartoon is a piece of trenchant political 
commentary, as it depicted Mr. Modi shackled in chains in the presence of United States President 
Donald Trump. This is an apparent reference to criticism voiced in some quarters that Mr. Modi failed to 
protest against the ill-treatment of Indian illegal immigrants deported from the U.S. The Prime Minister's 
approach to a foreign policy issue cannot be immune to symbolic denunciation through a cartoon. It is 
even more concerning that the Vikatan website itself has been rendered inaccessible to some users, 
apparently based on undisclosed orders or informal instructions to web service providers. 
While a formal order to take down content is provided for in law, it will be wholly untenable if the website 
was sought to be blocked without recourse to established procedure. The claim that the website has 
been inaccessible to some since February 15 has not been denied so far. Section 69A of the 
Information Technology Act empowers the government to block content on specified grounds, including 
in the interest of "friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to the 
commission of a cognizable offence", but it is not known which of these grounds has been invoked, as 
the order is confidential. How an order passed in the exercise of a statutory power can be deemed a 
secret is inexplicable. Even in times like the present when taking offence is a national pastime as well as 
a reason for several Chief Ministers to unleash the police on their detractors, cartoons ought to enjoy 
greater immunity than the written word. In this case, it is doubtful if political criticism through a cartoon 
can be deemed to affect friendly ties with the U.S. or undermine public order. The Centre would do well 
to reverse the blocking order soon. The power to block content ought to be used sparingly, mainly to 
combat offensive content such as hate speech, incitement to violence and child pornography, but not in 
deference to a political demand and without regard to freedom of expression.


Battle for growth: On India's economic trajectory 
Increase in government spending, private consumption bode well 
here was a significant uptick in India's economic trajectory, in the December quarter of this 
financial year (Q3FY25), registering a 6.2% real GDP growth rate, compared with a low 
revised estimate of 5.6% (5.4%) in the previous quarter. To be sure, this growth rate was the 
slowest since Q4FY23, except for the previous quarter's 5.6%. The 6.2% growth rate also 
suggests that the government's full-year growth target of 6.5% is virtually unattainable, given 
global headwinds of tariffs that could lead to imported inflation, amid tepid performance by 
the manufacturing and services sector domestically. The bulk of Q3FY25 growth has been bolstered by 
the primary sector, with a value-add of 5.2%, up from 1.8% in the same quarter last year. But growth in 
the secondary and tertiary sectors that make up manufacturing and services slowed to 4.8% and 7.4% 
respectively, compared with 12.4% and 8.3% last year. While Chief Economic Adviser V. Anantha 
Nageswaran acknowledged that a growth rate of 7.6% in the current quarter is ambitious amid global 
economic uncertainties, his suggestion that this growth is attainable sounds rather optimistic, unless 
the Maha Kumbh propelled a consumption spike that was able to buttress the current quarter's growth 
numbers. India's manufacturing and services sectors remain vulnerable to global trade uncertainties, 
such as the U.S.'s 25% import tariff on steel, and an equal percentage proposed on pharmaceuticals. 
About a third (31%) of India's pharma exports totalling $8.7 billion were to the U.S. in FY24. News of the 
proposed tariffs has sent shock waves, with some firms suggesting a pivot to producing in the U.S., 
which could potentially lead to a trade revenue loss for India. 
There are bright spots, however. The uptick of 8.3% (2.3%) in government spending and 6.9% (5.7%) 
growth in private consumption expenditure have been bolstered by a moderation in inflation. The RBI 
has projected inflation to average 4.8% in FY25, estimating that this would ease further to 4.2% in 
FY26, indicating a possible alignment with the RBI's medium-term target of 4%. However, these current 
estimates have come into question as the National Statistical Office (NSO) indicated that it has 
attempted a tweaking of its methodology, factoring in "industry-wise/institution-wise detailed information" 
but not quite elaborating on what material influence this has had on the quality and quantity of the data 
collected. The NSO went on to say that the 'overall as well as sectoral variations in advanced estimates 
is attributed to a revision of benchmark estimates and additional or updated data available on various 
indicators'. The NSO must clarify this revision in methodology to enable a more informed analysis of the 
data that it provides.