Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 90

Whites on greens: On Wimbledon 2025 
Wimbledon might be Djokovic's best chance for a 25th Slam 
ennis loves its traditions, and The Championships at Wimbledon more so. In the recent past 
though, the sport's most prestigious Major has progressively cut out many of its famed 
anachronisms. The bespoke grass-court seeding formula, the Middle Sunday holiday and 
best-of-five set doubles matches have all been done away with. Now, for the first time in the 
148-year history of the tournament, there will be no line judges, and electronic calling will take 
effect on all courts. Yet, when the first ball is struck on Monday, there will be no dearth of the verdant 
pomp and splendour. If anything, a less clustered court, with its glazed green grass, may lead to a better 
visual experience, and give the best players, clothed in pristine white, a broader canvas to work their 
magic on. Chief among them will be Jannik Sinner and Carlos Alcaraz, the world's top two men who 
have now established an engaging rivalry reminiscent of the Roger Federer-Rafael Nadal duels. Alcaraz, 
in fact, is the two-time defending champion at SW19 and has won four of his last five tournaments, 
including the Queen's Club Championships. World No. 1 Sinner does not have similar grass pedigree, 
but his first-ever Slam semifinal was at the All England Club in 2023, and he won the only meeting with 
Alcaraz on grass, at Wimbledon 2022. 
However, 24-time Major winner and seven-time Wimbledon champion Novak Djokovic is not to be 
discounted. The 38-year-old Serb is not in Slam-winning shape but grass presents the best chance. He 
finished runner-up in 2024 just weeks after a knee operation and the last time he exited Wimbledon 
before the final was in 2017. Among women, No. 1 Aryna Sabalenka, despite the bitter French Open 
final loss to Coco Gauff, remains the player to beat and there is no reason why her power-packed game 
cannot triumph in southwest London. But the last eight editions have seen eight different victors, pointing 
to an open field. For Gauff and five-time Major champion Iga Swiatek, Wimbledon has been the least 
rewarding Slam and they will be hoping to crack the code. American Gauff has not gone past the fourth 
round while Swiatek's best showing is quarterfinals. Defending champion Barbora Krejcikova, 2024 
runner-up Jasmine Paolini and 2022 winner Elena Rybakina are among the other notable names. The 
Indian presence will again be limited to doubles with Rohan Bopanna, Yuki Bhambri, Sriram Balaji and 
Rithvik Bollipalli competing. As the country's tennis remains stuck in a vicious cycle of a ____________ 
talent pool, administrative apathy and endless litigation, it will be up to these players to keep the flag 
flying. 
T


No time to rest: On India's ranking and the Sustainable Development Report 
India did well in climbing up SDG rankings, but falls short in governance 
India has been ranked among the top 100 countries in the Sustainable Development Report for the 
first time since this data began to be published by the Sustainable Development Solutions Network 
(SDSN) since 2016. The SDSN is an independent body under the aegis of the UN, whose 
publications are tracked by policymakers and governments. In 2016, India was ranked 110th out of 
157 countries, making steady progress to reach 99 this year out of an expanded basket of 167 
nations with better metrics and more granular comparisons. But it is no time to rest on this laurel. India 
must look at why this incline, by 11 points, was not achieved any sooner and the gaps to focus on. From 
a developmental perspective, the SDSN ranks India as having fared better in poverty reduction (SDG 1) 
even as India's poverty estimation continues to be mired in controversy due to a lack of publicly available 
consumption expenditure data since 2018 and the poverty line (Rangarajan line ~₹33/day rural, ₹47/day 
urban) not having been updated. Proxy data suggest a considerable poverty reduction, almost halving 
between 2012 (22% based on NSSO data) and 2023 (World Bank - 12%). 
But SDG 2 (zero hunger) has remained a cause for concern. It also reveals the wide disparity between 
income groups and rural and urban areas on access to a nutritious diet. The National Family Health 
Survey (NFHS) estimates that over a third of Indians (35.5%) were stunted (NFHS-5, 2019-21), only 
marginally better than 38.4% (NFHS-4, 2015-16). Similarly, wasting, which is low weight for height, 
reduced from 21.0% to 19.3%. Obesity in the working age population (15-49 years) has almost doubled 
between 2006 and 2021, and concentrated in wealthier urban areas. Electricity access (SDG 7) is 
another indicator where India has done well. While the country has achieved near universal household 
electrification in the past two decades, the quality of power and duration vary vastly based on regions 
and urban/rural fault lines. It is, however, laudable that India today ranks as the fourth largest renewables 
capacity deployer, mainly solar and wind. And while India has bettered its score in infrastructure 
provision (SDG 9), noteworthy additions being rapid mobile penetration and financial inclusion through 
UPI-linked digital payments gateways, COVID-19 revealed the stark difference between rural and urban 
Internet penetration, which must be addressed to achieve even higher educational outcomes (SDG 4). It 
is telling, however, that throughout the Modi years, India's performance in governance, the rule of law, 
press freedom and strong and independent institutions (SDG 16) has been lagging.