Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 76

Violent act: On the Washington shooting, the Palestine cause 
Violence against Israelis has no place in efforts to highlight Palestinian cause 
The U.S. capital was rocked by the murder of a young couple who served there as Israeli 
embassy staff. The assailant, who raised slogans to "Free Palestine" following his arrest 
shortly after the violent act, was named by authorities as Elias Rodriguez. He has been 
charged with two counts of first-degree murder, the murder of foreign officials, causing death 
with a firearm, and discharging a firearm in a crime of violence. According to reports, his social 
media accounts have indicated his close involvement with the pro-Palestinian protest movement. The 
victims, Yaron Lischinsky (30) and Sarah Lynn Milgrim (26), had plans to get married and had warm 
personal and professional ties with Israel and Palestine, reports noted. U.S. President Donald Trump's 
post on the social media platform, Truth Social, said, "These horrible D.C. killings, based obviously on 
antisemitism, must end, now!" Israel Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he was "outraged by the 
horrifying antisemitic murder", adding that the deaths were caused by "anti-Israeli incitement". He also 
linked the attack to actions by the leaders of the U.K., France and Canada, who had signed a candid 
joint letter recently, condemning Israel's actions in Gaza. Mr. Netanyahu has accused them of 
"emboldening Hamas to continue fighting forever" by calling on Israel to end the war there. 
If one thing is clear, it is that the Israel-Gaza conflict has firmly entrenched itself in the public discourse in 
the U.S., with policy implications as well. Soon after kicking off its second term in office, the Trump 
administration waded into the issue, controversially and unapologetically, when it began conducting 
immigration raids across U.S. universities, targeting any foreign student who had participated in protests 
for human rights in Gaza with detention and deportation. Similarly, Mr. Trump made it clear that he was 
not pulling his punches when the White House announced recently that it would follow up its drastic 
funding cuts and other restrictions on top-tier universities - it has accused them of not doing enough to 
prevent anti-Semitism on their campuses - with a ban on the enrolment of international students at 
Harvard. Although Harvard has received temporary respite - a block has been issued by a U.S. District 
Court in its favour - the risk of institutions of graduate learning facing "immediate and irreparable injury" 
remains high at this time. It is important for the international community to be able to criticise Israel's 
brutal war in Gaza and rein in Mr. Netanyahu without being seen as anti-Semitic or supportive of Hamas. 
But violence against Israelis has no place in the efforts to highlight the plight of the Palestinians.


No ceasefire: On the Russia-Ukraine war 
Russia is utilizing the deepening chasm among Ukraine's key allies 
krainian and Russian officials met up in Istanbul, Türkiye, last week, their first direct 
meeting since March 2022, the year when Russia invaded Ukraine. Little was achieved 
except for one agreement on swapping 1,000 prisoners of war each. The Ukrainian 
delegation rightfully complained that Moscow had made "new and unacceptable demands". 
Russia's posturing, however, seems to be a consequence of the dithering by Kyiv's key 
ally, the U.S. In the run-up to the meeting, Kyiv, which has been on the back foot in the conflict, losing 
substantial territory in the east and reeling under failures such as the retreat from the Kursk offensive, 
had sought a 30-day ceasefire - an outcome that the U.S. was also pushing. While the U.S. has been 
discernibly less enthusiastic about continuing to arm and support the Ukrainians, during Donald Trump's 
second term in the White House, Kyiv's European allies had urged Moscow to agree to the ceasefire, or 
face increased sanctions and the transfer of weapons to Ukraine. After pushing Kyiv to the meeting 
without the ceasefire as a precondition, Mr. Trump had said on the eve of the Istanbul meet that it would 
not yield anything until he met directly with Russian President Vladimir Putin. True to his mercurial 
nature, he went on to say that the conditions of a peace deal - which he has been pushing as a means 
for the U.S. to exit the conflict - could only be negotiated between Russia and Ukraine, with possible 
help from the Pope. 
Amid this diplomatic uncertainty from Washington, the Russians have shown no inclination to back down 
from their maximalist demands on rejecting security guarantees for Ukraine in the event of a truce, and 
for its demilitarization. This week, Russia continued to launch a barrage of attacks. Kyiv did manage to 
rally its European allies to support it militarily while imposing fresh sanctions on Russia. But the 
Ukrainian regime's precarity in its eastern regions is evident with Russia continuing to hold on to 
significant territory and gaining ground in fresh incursions from the east. With Mr. Trump showing scant 
regard towards taking a consistent position, and seemingly staking out a line that is different from that of 
the Europeans, Kyiv might be left with a Hobson's choice - accommodate some of Russia's territorial 
demands to begin the process of peace or endure the attritional war with limited support. Mr. Putin might 
have seized the upper hand in the geopolitical dynamics of the war, but its effects have been devastating 
for Moscow as well. Reason suggests that peace would yield greater dividends than continuing an illegal 
invasion and this should allow for a fresh impetus for talks leading to a ceasefire. The ball is in the 
Kremlin's court. 
U