Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 36

Transactional turn: On India and the new U.S. administration 
India must push back against the U.S. and safeguard its interests 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's visitto Washington last week wasbrief but packed with 
headline-generating developments. The visit came less than a month after U.S. President 
Donald Trump was sworn in, making Mr. Modi the fourth world leader to hold bilateral 
meetings with him, following the leaders of Israel, Japan, and Jordan, all close U.S. allies. The 
joint statement issued afterwards outlined a range of substantive discussions. While many 
announcements focused on India's purchases of American goods and investments in the U.S., 
they managed to avoid some of the tough measures many had anticipated. Both sides launched 
'Mission 500' ($500 billion in bilateral trade by 2030) and initiated discussions on a free trade agreement, 
with phase one of the draft expected this year. Mr. Trump announced an increase in Indian purchases of 
U.S. energy, oil, and defence equipment, moves expected to help balance the $45.7 billion U.S. trade 
deficit within the total $130 billion goods trade. Additionally, there was agreement on a new umbrella 
framework, COMPACT, or Catalyzing Opportunities for Military Partnership, Accelerated Commerce & 
Technology for the 21st Century, to streamline cooperation across key sectors. They also rebranded the 
Biden-era Initiative on Critical and Emerging Technologies (iCET) as Transforming the Relationship 
Utilizing Strategic Technology (TRUST), focusing on semiconductors, quantum computing, and AI, with a 
commitment to developing an AI infrastructure road map this year. A significant moment came when Mr. 
Trump announced his approval of the extradition of Tahawwur Rana, involved in 26/11 attacks, to India 
for trial. 
Once the dust settles on Mr. Trump's unconventional remarks and Mr. Modi's rare engagement with 
the media in this format, India must assess the broader takeaways from this visit. The positive optics and 
their camaraderie signal a strong foundation for India-U.S. relations over the next four years. There is 
also clear continuity in key areas of strategic partnership, including Indo-Pacific engagement and the 
Quad, with Mr. Trump's planned visit to Delhi for the Quad Summit later this year expected to reinforce 
these commitments. However, economic discussions, trade, energy, nuclear cooperation and defence 
are likely to dominate the India-U.S. agenda, giving the relationship a transactional turn reminiscent of 
Mr. Trump's first tenure. There is not much evidence that Mr. Modi's visit significantly softened Mr. 
Trump's stance on imposing counter-tariffs and reciprocal taxes or influenced a more humane approach 
to the deportation of undocumented immigrants aboard military flights. These could present challenges 
for the Indian government going forward. As India engages with the new U.S. administration, it must 
carefully assess its own interests, assert its position where necessary, and push back when required to 
safeguard its strategic and economic priorities.


Alarming shift: on the U.S. government and free speech rights 
Donald Trump's executive overreach calls for judicial intervention 
ecretary of State Marco Rubio has confirmed that there is an ongoing programme in the United 
States to revoke the visas of foreign students who are "taking activities that are counter to our 
national interest, to our foreign policy". Reports suggest that several hundred visas have been 
revoked, which include those held by Indian students. These reports also indicate that the U.S. 
government is using surveillance of social media activity as a basis for these revocations. Mr. 
Rubio also referenced the more troubling aspects of the Gaza war protests - Jewish students 
were reportedly harassed or university buildings were occupied. In his view, if an action would 
justify denying a visa at the application stage, it is grounds for revocation after issuance. However, this 
development raises concerns about the U.S. government's stance on the free speech rights of foreign 
nationals who reside in the country legally. Not all those affected by these visa revocations have been 
disruptive. The right to free speech is enshrined in the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. 
Although the amendment explicitly restricts Congress from curtailing speech, it has long been 
interpreted broadly. It protects "people", not just "citizens" - though the distinction may have been less 
defined at the time of its writing. 
Whether this right extends to foreign nationals legally present in the U.S. remains a grey area. Various 
laws - from those of the late 18th century to more recent regulations concerning the impact on U.S. 
foreign policy - have placed limits on such expression. Yet, historically, foreign students have often 
been vocal critics of U.S. domestic and foreign policies without facing punitive action. And, university 
administrations have generally defended the free speech rights of students and academics. Despite its 
imperfections - both historic, such as the internment of Japanese Americans during the Second World 
War, and ongoing, such as systemic racial inequalities - the U.S. has been a beacon of liberal values 
and due process. These are principles admired around the world, often more than its material wealth or 
professional opportunities. For many, it is the commitment to values such as free speech that makes the 
U.S. exceptional. That commitment now appears to be at risk. The U.S. system of checks and 
balances, which guards against the abuse of power, should assert itself - perhaps through judicial 
intervention - to rein in the overreach by the Trump administration and preserve the freedoms that 
define American democracy and inspire large parts of the world.