Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 60

The challenges of public health education in India 
The decision by the United States to withdraw from the World Health Organization (WHO) and 
drastically reduce the scale of the United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID) is one that has sent shock waves through the aid and public health world. This move 
has disrupted essential health-care services in many low- and middle-income countries. 
However, India has been largely unaffected, as international aid accounts for just 1% of its total 
health expenditure. Nevertheless, the cessation of such funding threatens to further shrink an 
already constrained public health development sector, which relies heavily on international support. 
More importantly, this development directly impacts the public health job market, reducing opportunities 
for thousands who are pursuing their Master of Public Health (MPH) and similar postgraduate courses. 
Public health plays a critical role in shaping a nation's well-being and health-care delivery. The 
Constitution of India, through Article 47, underlines the state's responsibility to improve public health 
care. Public health is a specialised field that requires specific knowledge and skills to effectively address 
people's health needs. There is an urgent need for a dedicated workforce in India trained in public 
health, a fact that was very starkly realised during the COVID-19 pandemic. Beyond government 
systems, such a workforce is essential for civil society organisations, academic institutions, and 
research organisations engaged in public health. 
Though the surge in public health education in India is relatively recent, its history dates to the colonial 
era. In the early days, public health was largely embedded within medical teaching. This narrow 
approach persisted despite the establishment of the All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 
Kolkata in 1932 and the subsequent inclusion of preventive and social medicine - later known as 
community medicine - as an essential part of medical education. Specialists in community medicine, 
well-trained in public health provided public health services and met human resource needs in this field. 
However, their numbers were limited, and they were often engaged in medical teaching. Many students 
pursued MPH courses abroad in countries such as Australia, the European Union, the United Kingdom 
and the U.S. Yet, the supply of public health professionals remained constrained. Recognizing the 
growing need and demand, MPH institutions and teaching expanded in India. The number of institutions 
offering MPH and related courses in India has grown rapidly. Currently, over 100 institutions offer 
master's level courses in public health, whereas in 2000, there was only one. This expansion coincided 
with the launch of the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) in 2005, which opened public health 
system roles to non-medical public health specialists. A wide range of institutions, from social science 
faculties to community medicine departments within medical institutions, have begun offering MPH 
courses. However, after an initial surge in demand, government recruitment for public health specialists 
plateaued, while the number of schools, programmes, and graduates continued to rise. As a result, 
securing jobs has become increasingly difficult for graduates. 
Compounding this issue are challenges such as the lack of standardized training, insufficient practical 
learning opportunities, faculty shortages, and varied curricula that inadequately prepare students for real-
world public health challenges. In addition, institutions offering public health courses are unevenly 
_________, with large and populous States such as Assam, Bihar and Jharkhand, and many smaller 
and hilly States, having none or only a limited number of seats.


Safe from space: On the return of the NASA mission space crew 
NASA did well to follow established protocol in bringing astronauts back 
In the early hours (IST) of March 19, 2025, a SpaceX crew capsule bearing NASA astronauts Sunita 
Williams, Barry Wilmore, Nick Hague, and Roscosmos cosmonaut Aleksandr Gorbunov splashed 
down off Florida. Ms. Williams and Mr. Wilmore had returned to the earth after nine months in the 
International Space Station (ISS), whereas they had originally been expected to spend eight days in 
the course of testing Boeing's Starliner crew capsule. The Starliner saga has now concluded, but 
not before it twisted the reality of human spaceflight out of context, making it sound like a caper 
rather than a testament to the virtues of protocol. Following Starliner's launch in June 2024, a series of 
malfunctions left Ms. Williams and Mr. Wilmore onboard the ISS before the capsule returned empty to 
the ground in September. The events spurred concerns and indignation in the popular imagination, 
swirling around a dearth of information both NASA and Boeing were reluctant to fill. As their stay was 
expanded to nine months, curiosity swelled over their well-being. While this response was natural, 
speculation fueled by insufficient updates and political propaganda in the U.S. also fanned 
misinformation that cast Ms. Williams and Mr. Wilmore as having been "stranded" in space. 
If the "stranded" narrative captures the gist of Starliner's failure, it misses the inalienable contingencies 
at the heart of human spaceflight. Ms. Williams herself has sought to downplay the use of such terms. 
Over the years, but especially in the wake of the Challenger and Columbia shuttle disasters in 1986 and 
2003, NASA has instituted procedures its personnel are required to follow in a variety of situations 
where events buck a pre-planned sequence. One is that astronauts onboard malfunctioning spacecraft 
can move to the ISS, which is always prepared to host such visitors. But many actors framed NASA as 
weak-willed for sticking to its protocols. When it scrubbed a prior launch attempt of the capsule that 
returned the astronauts for technical reasons, supporters of U.S. President Donald Trump accused the 
agency of infirmity rather than acknowledging it as a well-known safety measure. Narratives that 
overlook the simple fact that two veterans were picked to pilot Starliner's first crewed flight belie the 
existence of multiple safety checkpoints and the great lengths to which space agencies go to ensure 
one unexpected outcome does not spell catastrophe. People, including in India - where concern for 
Ms. Williams parallels a growing pride in the country's budding human spaceflight programme owing to 
her Indian ancestry - would do well to replace notions of triumphalism in space with good old "safety 
first". Also, space agencies should realize the importance of clear, timely communication as an integral 
part of safety protocol.