Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 67

Catching a break: On the inflation dip and households 
January's inflation dip brings respite for households but fresh risks are building up 
 healthy winter harvest of vegetables reined in food inflation to a five-month low of 6% in 
January, driving down India's consumer price inflation to 4.3%, tantalizingly close to the 4% 
median target pursued by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). For urban consumers, in fact, 
inflation eased to 3.9%, while rural consumers faced a much-moderated 4.6% uptick in 
prices. This constitutes some relief for households, especially the urban middle class which has been 
awaiting relief from food inflation and has pulled back on other spending. If inflation holds around this 
level for some time, this may have broader connotations for consumption and growth impulses 
gathering fresh steam. The RBI, which slashed interest rates last week in anticipation of declining 
inflation, must be relieved too. As per its own reckoning, with this quarter expected to average 4.4% 
inflation, there may be a minor uptick from January's 4.3% price rise over this month and March. On 
Thursday (February 13, 2025), citing the inflation decline and the RBI's projection of an average inflation 
of 4.2% in 2025-26, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman exuded confidence in Parliament that food 
prices will be under control this year, with farm output estimates suggesting a healthy uptick. 
Some dark clouds, however, loom over this benign inflation outlook that is expected to create more 
room for the central bank to cut rates further and support growth. With the rupee declining 4% against 
the U.S. dollar so far in the second half of 2024-25, imported inflation can play spoilsport, particularly on 
fuels, and edible oils where imports constitute 60% of India's consumption needs. If commuting costs, 
which accounted for the highest chunk of households' non-food spending in 2023-24, and cooking fuel 
costs flare up along with the price of fats to fry one's meals, household budgets will be exacerbated 
afresh. Edible oil prices have been rising sharply for a few months already, with high global prices 
compounded by the Centre's decision to impose import duties. They were up 15.6% in January, the 
highest in almost three years. Wholesale prices for edible oils jumped 33.1%, indicating there is likely 
more pass-through of these costs in retail prices. Any weather shocks this coming summer and monsoon 
could also undo food price gains. The RBI, which is seeking to curb the volatility in the rupee, will be 
mindful of these risks, and having retained a neutral monetary policy stance, may hold off on its growth 
pursuit if warranted. To alleviate price pressures, the government, after unveiling income tax cuts to 
boost middle class consumption, should be open to slashing indirect taxes - fuel levies, import duties, 
and GST - as they affect all sections of society, including the most vulnerable.


Blunt weapon: On Internet shutdowns 
India should end Net access curbs, especially when imposed without good reason 
The number of Internet shutdowns in India was slightly lower in 2024 than in 2023, according to 
the Software Freedom Law Center (SLFC), India's annual report. A separate report by the web 
rights advocacy, Access Now, shows that India continues to lead globally in the number of 
government-ordered Internet shutdowns. The Union government has maintained that mobile 
Internet shutdown is an indispensable instrument in the toolkit to control law and order 
situations. Most of the Internet use in India is mobile. A closer examination of the shutdowns 
imposed even over the last year reveals some disturbing data: 41 of the 84 shutdowns in India in 2024 
were imposed during protests, compared to the 23 that were imposed for communal clashes. Five were 
even issued for cheating during examinations. In situations on the brink of violence where rapidly 
spreading disinformation may swerve out of control of the authorities, there may be a case for 
considering restrictions on communications. But no shutdown is without a cost - the delayed 
information regarding violence can also ________ fast response. The Supreme Court of India 
recognized this when it ruled, in Anuradha Bhasin vs Union of India, that each shutdown must meet the 
tests of necessity and proportionality. Internet shutdown impedes people's livelihoods, access to 
medical care and education. It is a blunt weapon and the least the government could do is to measure its 
impact and use it sparingly. The government has been urged on preparing such an assessment for 
years, but no headway has been made here. 
Even for those in favour of retaining shutdowns as a tool in the repertory of emergency policing, the 
process being followed is cause for alarm. Many a time, as Access Now and SFLC report, there is no 
valid order uploaded on government websites detailing the duration and the causes in detail, as required 
by the Telecommunications (Temporary Suspension of Services) Rules, 2024 and its preceding rules of 
2017. Ideally, every shutdown should be followed by a sombre examination of whether it was necessary 
and what its deployment cost was. The ideal number of Internet shutdowns in any country is zero. It is 
especially troubling that 296 of them were imposed on millions around the world last year. India's case 
shows that there is an urgent need for circumspection and restraint. The Internet shutdowns index is, 
after all, one of the indices in which India should not aspire to lead.