Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 3

Preparing for the worst: On Cyclone Fengal, the future 
Extreme weather events will increase in frequency in the coming years 
It is not uncommon for the southern peninsula to experience heavy or very heavy rainfall during the 
northeast monsoon, which is also important for Sri Lanka and the Maldives. But when Cyclone Fengal 
crossed the coast, close to Puducherry, on the night of November 30, neither Tamil Nadu nor 
Puducherry expected the magnitude of devastation that occurred. In a letter to Prime Minister Narendra 
Modi, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M.K. Stalin said nearly seven million families and 15 million individuals 
have been affected. Sixteen people, including four in Puducherry, lost their lives. A landslip in 
Tiruvannamalai claimed seven lives including five children. Unusually heavy rainfall (40 cm-50 cm) was 
recorded in many places in Puducherry and the northern and northwestern parts of Tamil Nadu on a 
single day. An initial estimate puts over 2.21 lakh hectares of farmland including 10,000 hectares in 
Puducherry to be under water. The cyclonic storm later weakened and crossed coastal Karnataka, 
adjoining east central Arabian Sea. Though many southern parts received rain, Puducherry and several 
districts in Tamil Nadu bore the brunt. What worsened the plight of people in some districts was the flood 
in the otherwise-dry South Pennai river; on Monday, it had a flow of 2.4 lakh cusecs. Mr. Stalin has 
sought an immediate release of ₹2,000 crore from the Centre. The Puducherry Chief Minister, N. 
Rangasamy, has announced assistance of ₹210 crore. 
It is time that the authorities concerned prepared themselves to face extreme weather events, given the 
rising frequency of very high rainfall. Last year, Kayalpattinam in Thoothukudi received 95 cm, whereas, 
this time, northern and northwestern districts faced a similar experience. A 2022 monograph by the India 
Meteorological Department concluded that, on an average, four depressions or cyclonic storms could be 
expected to affect the southern peninsula every season. The authorities should intensify their concrete 
and tangible long-term steps beyond the routine ways of providing relief and rehabilitation. Even though 
Chennai was not hit badly this time, the State government must make public the report of the Advisory 
Committee for Mitigation and Management of Flood Risk in the Chennai Metropolitan Area, led by former 
civil servant V. Thiruppugazh. Other measures such as a strengthening of bunds, regular removal of silt 
from water courses and a relentless drive against encroachment of water bodies must be carried out. 
Only such steps will be purposeful to the people; taking prideabout age-old irrigationmanagement is not 
enough. 
I


First step: On the Israel-Hezbollah ceasefire 
Without further measures, Israel's ceasefire with Hezbollah will not hold 
When Hezbollah decided to start firing rockets into Israel in October 2023 after the Israel-Hamas war 
broke out, "in solidarity with the Palestinians", the then chief of the Shia militant group, Hassan Nasrallah, 
said he would ceasefire only if Israel ceased fire in Gaza. When Israel Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu decided to send ground troops into Lebanon on October 1, 2024 - Israel's fourth invasion - 
The said the main objective was for the over 50,000 residents of northern Israel, displaced by Hezbollah 
rockets, to return to their homes. In less than two months, Hezbollah and Israel have climbed down from 
their maximalist positions and agreed to a U.S. and France-mediated ceasefire. According to the 
agreement, all Israeli troops would withdraw from Lebanon to the Israeli side of the border, while 
Hezbollah would redeploy its forces to the north of the Litani river. The Lebanese army would be 
deployed in areas between the Israeli border and the Litani and entrusted with enforcing the ceasefire. 
Both sides have claimed victory. Israel says Hezbollah is not the same organisation it used to be, while 
Hezbollah claimed that it had taken a "divine victory" against the Israelis. The reality is that both have 
suffered setbacks and wanted a break. 
Hezbollah lost many fighters and top commanders, including Nasrallah. Hezbollah strongholds in 
Lebanon, including the border villages and the Dahiye, the southern Shia neighbourhood of Beirut, were 
pulverised by Israel. Israel's failures were starker. True, Israel possesses higher air superiority which it 
used to weaken Hezbollah's capabilities. But it did not make many territorial advances in southern 
Lebanon. It faced stiff resistance from Hezbollah and took high casualties. Worse, Israel's bombings had 
little impact on Hezbollah's capability to fire rockets. On November 24, Hezbollah fired over 250 rockets 
into Israel. Some hit high security zones, including a residence of Mr. Netanyahu. According to a 
Channel 13 poll, most Israelis believe that Hezbollah has not been defeated. So, given their setbacks, it 
is unsurprising that both sides have given up their original demands and settled for a ceasefire. While it 
is good news for West Asia, it could be short-lived if further measures are not taken. Israel and 
Hezbollah could rearm and refresh themselves before returning to fighting if Israel's disproportionate war 
on Gaza continues. The U.S., which played a constructive role in the Lebanon ceasefire, should build on 
the momentum and push for a ceasefire in Gaza. U.S. President Joe Biden has less than two months in 
office, which he should use to correct a policy that gave unconditional support for Israel's war on Gaza 
and use America's leverage over its ally to bring some relief to millions of Palestinians living under 
constant Israeli bombardment.