Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 15

Energy and efficiency: On India and greater energy efficiency mandates 
India must reduce its power consumption by increasing efficiency 
espite robust growth in electricity generation over the past two decades, with rapid 
additions of renewable energy in the past five years, India has been unable to meet its peak 
power demand, with the deficit widening from 0.69% in FY20 to about 5% in FY24. This 
reveals constraints in the supply of power - new power production is time consuming, 
especially if fossil-fuel based, even as India attempts to integrate renewable power into the 
power grid. Therefore, India must focus on enhancing energy efficiency holistically to reduce power 
demand, also the quickest and least expensive way to address rising power demand and climate 
change. This year marks a decade of India's groundbreaking energy efficiency scheme, UJALA, which 
has helped bring down the price of energy efficient light emitting diode (LED) bulbs from about ₹500 a 
decade ago to ₹70, enabling its widespread home use. The scheme succeeded as another public energy 
efficiency measure was baked into the initiative - the Street Lighting National Programme, which led to 
the installation of over 1.34 crore LED lamps across urban local bodies and gram panchayats, and 
reducing peak demand by over 1,500 MW. As of January 2025, the government has distributed about 37 
crore LED bulbs and enabled the sale of about 407 crore more. 
LED bulbs consume half the amount of power of compact fluorescent lamps, while incandescent light 
bulbs require nine times the power that LEDs consume, translating into considerable cost savings for 
Indian homes. But estimates also suggest that the UJALA scheme alone has helped India save over $10 
billion and avoided building over 9,500 MW of new generation capacity, which is the equivalent of 19 
new coal-fired 500 MW power plants. Indeed, there are other energy efficiency measures that India has 
taken following the enactment of the Energy Conservation Act, 2001. The International Energy Agency 
states that between 2000 and 2018, energy efficiency improvements enabled India to avoid an additional 
15% of energy demand and 300Mt of CO₂ emissions. But with India's rapid urbanisation in the past two 
decades and rising per capita energy consumption to meet cooling needs as summers get hotter, peak 
power demand reached 250 GW last year. India is today the third largest power consumer globally, after 
China and the United States. Moreover, 70% of its energy output continues to be from coal and India has 
plans to add another 90 GW of coal-based capacity by 2032. What is needed now is greater energy 
efficiency mandates across sectors such as buildings, home appliances and the country's sprawling 
MSMEs. 
D


Sheer negligence: On the Puri stampede 
India's shameful VIP culture has no place in public events 
here have been nine stampedes in India in the past 12 months, with six of them at religious 
gatherings. This includes the most recent one, at the storied Jagannath temple's annual 
chariot procession in Puri, Odisha, early on June 29, 2025. Three people were killed and more 
than 50 injured. Acknowledging "negligence "and "security lapses", the State government was 
swift to order a probe. The centuries-old chariot procession is an annual and month-long 
event between June and July. But the heart of the festival is the nine-day chariot procession, or Rath 
Yatra, when Lord Jagannath travels with his two siblings, Balabhadra and Subhadra, to their aunt 
Gundicha's home. About half a million devotees visit the three-kilometre radius around the temple. While 
a full investigation is pending, initial reports suggest that tell-tale signs of a stampede were overlooked. 
On the first day of the yatra, officials paused the drawing of Lord Jagannath's chariot around 7.45 p.m. 
because of an 'unprecedented rush', allowing only Balabhadra's and Subhadra's chariots to move. The 
Jagannath chariot was moved symbolically and deferred till early on Saturday. In the intervening hours, 
about 750 devotees were hospitalised due to heat, dehydration, and crowd stress. Eyewitnesses 
reported that a common exit gate was closed to create a separate "VIP entry," forcing everyday pilgrims 
to exit through the same entrance path that was already congested. A single corridor that was being 
used for the flow in both directions resulted in more congestion, amplifying crowd pressure. The 
delayed arrival of the chariot also caused a bottleneck outside the Gundicha temple just before dawn. 
With exhausted pilgrims, merged traffic flows and no exit access, the stage was set for a tragedy. 
Further, trucks with ritual materials entered this zone at 4.20 a.m. This unexpected movement shattered 
stalls, toppled devotees and triggered panic. This daily has highlighted India's tawdry record in crowd 
management, at religious gatherings, celebrity-studded events, political rallies or post sporting festivities. 
Given that the climate discourse is at front and centre globally, providing thermal comfort, hydration 
facilities and taking precautions to shield women, children and the elderly from the heat especially 
during peak summer should have been woven into the conduct of the rath yatra years ago. As for VIPs, 
one way is to restrict any privileged entry and to provide access at the beginning or at the end of 
festivities, allowing other visitors predictable and barrier-free access. But the best way is to end India's 
entrenched VIP culture. 
T