Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 12

Canary in the canopy: on the India State of Forest Report 2023 
Economic growth cannot be allowed to bypass environment laws 
hrough history, forests for humans have been sites of shelter, food, livelihoods, protection, and 
strength of spirit. According to the new India State of Forest Report 2023, 25% of India's land is 
covered by forests or trees, on its face a healthy figure and a step closer to the National Forest 
Policy's prescriptions. But big numbers always hide problems. Post-Independence, India's forest 
governance has been typified by attempts to break free from European colonialists' insular view of 
forests as sources of timber, codified in laws the country inherited. Two significant achievements in this 
regard were the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 and the Forest (Rights) Act 2006. The counteracting 
forces of industrial development and the pressures of climate change on the state have however troubled 
the implementation of both Acts and the government has, sadly, chosen the easy way out. 
Courts and conservationists have demanded that the state follow the dictionary definition of forests 
whereas the administration has been muddying it to exclude "community" forests, among others, while 
including plantations and orchards. Even if the administration's impetus is murky, it is allowing India to 
claim it is growing its carbon sink towards its climate commitments while allowing developmental 
activities to continue unimpeded. Thus, the 25% figure hides forest cover loss in the biodiverse Western 
Ghats, the Nilgiris and the northeast, the shrinking of mangroves in the Kutch and the Andamans, and of 
'moderately dense' forests and the ongoing endangerment of open natural ecosystems. The report also 
lacks details about whether its estimates of the carbon sequestration potential of degraded land account 
for the specific uses to which they are currently being subjected. Forest loss in biodiverse areas cannot 
be adjusted with new plantations elsewhere, the consequences of which are exacerbated by the decision 
to include even commercial plantations, which have lower sequestration and ecological value, and the 
continued use of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act. Indeed, the growing gap between theoretical 
and actual forests also extends to finances. In several northern districts, the extent of forest cover that 
suffered fire losses has increased by an order of magnitude in two years. Ground reports by The Hindu 
have documented a paucity of human resources, skill, and equipment to control fires. Economic growth 
is essential and trees will be lost, but this is precisely why the friction that laws impose on the growth 
impulse is essential too. Yet, the government has been weakening environmental safeguards - more 
recently, the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act 2023 further contracted the 1980 Act's purview - 
and distorting its official inventory of forests. It is hard to imagine anyone winning in the end. 
T


Resilience or stress? 
Employment in informal manufacturing enterprises is not back to pre-demonetization 
levels 
The official narrative on the findings of National Statistical Office's latest Annual Survey of 
Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) 2023-24 is that it indicates robust recovery from 
the disruption caused by Covid-19. Key metrics such as the number of establishments, workers, 
wages, and productivity show significant year-on-year growth although this partly reflects the 
fact that the favourable base effect created by the pandemic is still playing out. Even so, this has 
implications for the India growth story as it depends on the health of the vast number of unincorporated 
non-agricultural enterprises - which are not legally registered as companies - that belong to the informal 
sector. These enterprises are not just stand-alone entities but also support the incorporated or formal 
sector by acting as suppliers and services providers, thereby forming an integral part of the domestic 
value chain. These small businesses contribute 28 to 30% of the nation's output of goods and services or 
GDP and 40% of employment. 
According to ASUSE 2023-24, the number of unincorporated enterprises rose to 73.4 million from the 
pandemic lows of 59.7 million in 2021-22 while adding 22.7 million workers to 120.6 million. Prima facie, 
it would appear that this sector is indeed showing resilience after the pandemic. However, the pandemic 
was not the only disruption for the informal economy as it has been buffeted by earlier shocks like 
demonetization which took high value notes out of circulation in November 2016, and the implementation 
of the goods and services tax in July 2017. As cash accounts for bulk of transactions in India, 
demonetization struck a body blow to unincorporated enterprises impacting daily wage earners in urban 
areas as also in the villages. There was no money to pay wages to around 46% of informal workers who 
were either casual or contractual. Around 65% of daily wage earners went without work in urban areas 
as informal enterprises downed shutters and they returned to their villages. 
What does not augur well for the health of unincorporated enterprises is that the shift back to agriculture 
still continues unabated, rising to 46.1% of the workforce in 2023-24 from 44% in 2017-18, according to 
the Periodic Labour Force Surveys. This is a reversal of what is associated with modern economic 
development. The continuing stress in non-agricultural unincorporated enterprises is most evident in the 
fact that employment in manufacturing still remains below the levels before demonetization: there were 2 
million fewer workers in this sector in 2023- 24 when compared to 36 million in 2015-16 although the 
number of enterprises is unchanged at 19.8 million. 
T 

            In the case of trade, the number of enterprises and employment is broadly unchanged. Over this period, 
the overall increase in enterprises by 10 million and employment by 9 million is in services. According to 
a yardstick suggested by Pronab Sen, former chief statistician of India, had unincorporated non-
agricultural enterprises not faced all these shocks, the number of enterprises normally rises by 2 million 
annually. Since 2015-16, there would have been 79 million enterprises as against 73.4 million in 2023-
24. In effect, 6 million enterprises were lost. As a typical unincorporated enterprise employs between 2.5 
and 3 persons, close to 15-18 million jobs were lost in the process. While the post-pandemic recovery of 
such enterprises is no doubt impressive, a more nuanced picture emerges if one takes into account the 
disruptions to the informal sector before Covid-19.