Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 21

Damage control: On the Tibet earthquake 
Adherence to existing regulations can limit the impact of earthquakes 
This week, an early-morning earthquake in Tibet of magnitude 7.1 and originating at a depth 
of 10 km has reportedly claimed at least 100 lives and damaged buildings and houses. The 
tremors from the quake were felt in Nepal as well as parts of Bihar and even New Delhi, 
thousands of kilometres away. The main earthquake was followed by at least two 
aftershocks. If the epicentre had been located closer to India, the damage could have been 
manifold. Earthquakes in the Himalayas evoke a special kind of dread in the country. 
Memories of two deadly quakes in Nepal in April and May of 2015 that killed at least 9,000 and caused 
incalculable damage still bubble up. The tectonic plates are the gigantic shards into which Earth is 
broken up. Layered on them are the continents and the seas. These plates are constantly in motion - 
colliding with, diverging with, or sliding past one another. The Indian plate collided with the Eurasian 
plate and the crust tilted upwards, creating the Himalayas. The fractured zones along which they interact 
create the fault lines where earthquakes occur. By studying these faults and the pattern of past 
earthquakes, seismologists can estimate how much latent energy at these fault lines, which can run 
thousands of miles, has been released and how much of it still resides in them. 
Scientists have long warned of a massive, overdue earthquake in the Garhwal-Kumaon range because 
of what is known about the pattern of quakes in the region. The records of the last 300 years suggest 
that those that have occurred have not released all the pent-up energy and that is why there is a broad 
consensus among experts that an 8-magnitude temblor is overdue. Unfortunately, predicting the day 
and time is outside the ambit of current science. Thus, the best we can hope for is insulation against 
the projected damage. It is in this context that infrastructure development in the Himalayan region must 
be viewed. While several of these projects are intended to smooth the movement of people and goods, 
the recurrent landslides and glacial lake outbursts that wash away dams, hydropower projects, and 
roads serve as a constant reminder of the inherent fragility of the region. Every form of infrastructure in 
the region - power plant or dam - must take into account the imminence of a major earthquake and 
the associated costs factored into planning. Adhering to already existing building codes, not only in the 
Himalayas but in the surrounding Indo-Gangetic plains, can go a long way in limiting the inevitable 
damage.


Strong setback: On the Maoist attacks on security forces in Chhattisgarh 
The IED blasts in Bijapur are the act of a flailing insurgency 
hen an insurgent organisation is faced with a precipice, it has two options - it can 
either go down with a fight and pull some of its adversaries across the cliff or it can see 
the futility of its aims and give up the fight for good. Ideologically motivated insurgent 
organizations rarely choose the second option, especially those that are engaged in 
decades of conflict. Even those organizations such as the Revolutionary Armed Forces 
of Colombia (FARC) that gave up violent insurgency and entered into an armistice find 
it difficult to convince factions or cadres who are committed to the violence as a means of not just 
rebellion but also of their existence. Since the merger of various Naxalite currents into the party in the 
early 2000s, the Communist Party of India (Maoist) has rarely ventured to speak of peace and ending the 
violent conflict except for tactical reasons. Its ideology not just talks of the utilization of violence for its 
aims but also makes it central to its existence. The dastardly killing of eight security personnel and a 
civilian driver in an improvised explosive device blast in Bijapur district of Chhattisgarh on Monday 
(January 6, 2025) might seem like a sign that the potency of the CPI(Maoist) in inflicting such acts 
remains, and, therefore, the Maoists are a dangerous insurgent force. While there is a grain of truth to 
that, especially in the Abujmarh jungles and adjoining areas of the Bastar region in the State, it is also 
accurate to suggest that these are acts of a flailing outfit struggling to retain what was the only bastion 
for the left extremist organisation. 
The deaths of the security personnel, who belonged to the District Reserve Guard and Bastar Fighters 
of the Chhattisgarh Police, are certainly a setback to the anti-Maoist operations that have picked up 
pace and resulted in significant deaths of Maoist cadres and other tribal people caught in the conflict. In 
2024, an estimated 296 insurgents died in the operations while security forces lost 24 people and there 
were 80 civilian deaths. To suffer eight casualties early in 2025 is a major blow and one of the severest 
losses for the security forces in recent years. The heavy use of explosives and the camouflaged nature 
of the planted IEDs suggest that the Maoists had planned this attack for a long time; the last such IED 
blast was in April 2023 in Dantewada. The knee-jerk reaction to this incident will be the security forces 
intensifying their operations to identify the culprits, potentially targeting innocent civilians. While stepping 
up the security campaign is inevitable considering the fact that the Maoists have refused to abjure 
violence, the security personnel and the government should not get carried away in retaliation and 
target civilians as this would play right into the hands of Maoist propaganda about state repression. As 
tempting as it is to wipe out the Maoist movement through military means, as the union Home minister 
has promised, it is still prudent to use civil society actors to work out a ceasefire agreement and utilize it 
to end the conflict.