Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 50

Leaky pipeline: On India and permanent scientific staff 
India must ensure it retains the services of committed scientists 
 recent report analysing public funded research and development institutions in India had 
some pointers that should raise an alarm. In several of the 244 institutions studied, there 
was a decrease in the number of permanent, scientific staff in 2022-23 compared to the 
previous year. There were also fewer organisations in 2022-23 compared to the previous 
year that reported hiring permanent staff. The institutes together had 19,625 contractual 
staff and 12,042 permanent staff in 2022-23. Not surprisingly, the slowdown in hiring was made up by 
hiring scientific research personnel on short-term contracts. These contractual staff were a 14% rise over 
2021-22. The very fact that contractual workers exceed permanent staff in scientific institutions is a 
matter of concern. This data emerges from a study commissioned by the Office of the Principal Scientific 
Adviser and the institutions studied, do not include the 'strategic sectors', such as defence, atomic 
energy and space which consume the lion's share of India's research and development expenditure. As 
a report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science, Technology and Environment tabled in 
Parliament last month observed, nearly three in five of the posts sanctioned for scientific personnel at 
one of India's top institutes for basic science research, the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research 
(TIFR), are unfilled. The TIFR is primarily funded by the Department of Atomic Energy. Further, the 
parliamentary report found that, on average, one in four of sanctioned posts at the key atomic energy 
research institutions and nuclear power plants was vacant. Clearly the rot runs deep. 
On the one hand, the government has announced missions to develop quantum computers and develop 
foundational artificial intelligence models. It has also declared its intent to align research and 
development towards industry-specific research. However, none of this will bear fruit without scientists, 
particularly young researchers who are engaged full-time, having long careers at institutions doing 
cutting-edge research. The government had once set up institutions such as the Indian Institutes of 
Science Education and Research (IISER) and introduced four-year undergraduate programmes in basic 
science, precisely because the incentives then were not strong enough to retain potential scientists. India 
needs to ensure that the conditions for research, such as respectable salaries, funds and equipment to 
do good research, are made available more widely. 
A


Minerals gamble: On the U.S.-Ukraine mineral deal 
The pact with the U.S. does little for Ukraine's security 
fter painstaking negotiations, marked by inflammatory exchanges, Washington and Kyiv 
have signed an agreement that would grant the U.S. access to Ukraine's critical mineral 
and oil and gas resources through a joint investment fund. Ukraine has claimed that it would 
lead to an equal economic partnership, while its actual impact remains uncertain. The idea 
of a minerals deal was proposed by Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy last year to 
the Biden administration as part of his "victory plan". His pitch was to open up Ukraine's vast 
untapped critical minerals resources (which include lithium, graphite, uranium and titanium, 
besides rare earth minerals) in exchange for continued American military support and security 
guarantees. After Donald Trump assumed the presidency, he supported a minerals deal, but an entirely 
different one. He insisted that Kyiv repay the billions of dollars provided as military and economic 
assistance during the war by granting U.S. companies access to Ukraine's resources. At one point, the 
disagreement escalated into a public spat at the Oval Office between Mr. Zelenskyy and Mr. Trump. But 
both sides pressed ahead, which culminated in the April 30 deal. 
For Ukraine, the agreement represents an improvement over Mr. Trump's previous proposals. There is 
no reference to aid as debt in the fine print. Under the deal, the United States-Ukraine Reconstruction 
Investment Fund will finance extraction projects in Ukraine's resources. Kyiv will share 50% of the 
revenues from these projects towards the fund. While the agreement omits any reference to past U.S. 
aid, future American assistance will be considered as capital contributions to the fund - Ukraine will 
have to repay future aid through resource revenues. More importantly, although Mr. Zelenskyy originally 
envisioned a minerals deal as a pathway to securing security guarantees from the U.S., the final 
agreement offers no explicit American security commitments to Kyiv. Ukrainian officials have portrayed 
the deal, which needs to be ratified by Parliament, as a win-win. But it actually underscores Kyiv's 
growing vulnerabilities in a war that shows no sign of abating. Mr. Zelenskyy and his generals are 
aware that if American support dries up, their embattled forces would be in peril. And Mr. Trump has 
already rejected Ukraine's most pressing demand - firm security guarantees. Facing limited options, 
Ukraine has signed the agreement in the hope that it would at least ensure continued flow of U.S. military 
assistance in the form of U.S. investments to the fund. But Mr. Zelenskyy's minerals gamble will pay off 
only if the Trump administration stays committed to helping end the war. If the war drags on, with Russia 
forces continuing to advance in the east, the minerals deal would mean little for Ukraine's security.