Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 30

A call for chaos: On Donald Trump's Gaza Strip proposal 
The United States should push for a two-state solution, not displace an entire 
people 
hen the state of Israel was created in Palestine in 1948, more than 7,00,000 
Palestinians, the land's original inhabitants, were displaced. Palestinians remember 
this forced mass expulsion as the Nakba (catastrophe). More Palestinians were 
expelled during the Six-Day War in 1967. Some moved to Gaza, others to the West 
Bank, while the majority fled to other countries, where they and their descendants are 
refugees. In successive peace talks, Israel has outrightly rejected their right to return 
to their homes, a fundamental right. Now, U.S. President Donald Trump wants to forcibly transfer the 
2.3 million Palestinians out of Gaza, the Mediterranean enclave that has suffered relentless Israeli 
bombardment for 15 months. His plan involves relocating Palestinians to neighbouring Arab countries, 
taking over the 360 sq. km strip which he calls a "hellhole" and redeveloping it into the Riviera of the 
Middle East. At a press conference in Washington DC, with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, 
The also stated sending troops to Gaza "if necessary". The White House later claimed that he meant a 
temporary relocation of Palestinians. It also clarified that he had not committed to deploying U.S. troops 
but reaffirmed that his "out-of-the-box" proposal for Gaza was a serious one. However, Mr. Trump's plan 
has at least three fundamental problems. 
First, Palestinians are not an imperial possession that Israel and the U.S. can bomb and relocate at 
will. They are a people with a national identity, whose collective history, present and future, is deeply tied 
to the Palestinian land. Despite relentless Israeli bombardment, the Palestinians of Gaza have refused to 
leave. Now, Mr. Trump is advocating what is essentially a call for ethnic cleansing, another Nakba. 
Second, Arab countries, including many of America's allies, have unequivocally rejected Mr. Trump's 
proposal. They understand that Palestinians who were forcefully removed never managed to return. 
Even authoritarian Arab rulers, regardless of their dependence on U.S. aid, must pay attention to the 
sentiments of their people, who overwhelmingly support Palestinian rights. Third, Mr. Trump's vision of 
rebuilding Gaza aligns closely with the Israeli far-right's agenda: resettling the land with Jewish settlers. 
This will further alienate an already desperate population and plant yet another time bomb in West Asia. 
Mr. Trump must abandon his calls for the ethnic cleansing and instead use America's influence to ensure 
a successful ceasefire in Gaza. The U.S. should be working toward a lasting, just solution - one that 
acknowledges Palestinian rights and upholds the principles of peace and stability in the region.


Income Tax Bill, 2025: 
Dawn of a new era 
The current tax system in India owes its origin to the first War of Independence in 1857. It was 
to fill the near-empty treasury of the British government ruling India that the first Income Tax Act 
was introduced in 1860. After a few iterations in the ensuing years, a comprehensive Income 
Tax Act was passed in 1922. In 1956, Nicholas Kaldor submitted an extensive report for a 
coordinated tax system culminating in the introductions of ancillary taxes like wealth and gift 
taxes and, eventually, an overhauled Income Tax Act, 1961. In keeping with the ethos of the 
sixties and seventies, the direct tax code kept getting amended year after year with the ostensible aim 
of promoting equity (through increasingly progressive tax rates which reached an astounding peak of 
over 97% in the seventies), plugging "loop-holes" to prevent tax evasion and "promote" growth of certain 
sectors and regions through specific incentives and deductions. Unfortunately, this approach only 
resulted in a complete breakdown of trust between the tax administration and tax-payers and a huge 
incentive for rent-seeking behaviour. A serious attempt to reform India's tax system was made through 
the introduction of a long-term fiscal policy in 1986, laying out a road map for a stable and moderate 
regime. This was followed by setting up a tax reforms committee (TRC) under the chairmanship of Raja 
Chelliah. The major tax reforms introduced in the nineties were based on the recommendation of the 
TRC. Finally, in 2002 two task forces (on direct and indirect taxes) were set up under the chairmanship 
of Vijay Kelkar and many changes made there-after in the tax laws had their underpinnings in the 
transformative reforms recommended in the Kelkar Committee reports. 
The short history enumerated above serves a useful context for the metamorphosis of the income tax 
law and administration in India to the point of the current Income Tax Act "which has been 
overburdened and language has become complex, increasing cost of compliance for taxpayers and 
hampering efficiency of direct tax administration" (statement of objects and reasons for introduction of 
the current Bill). The structure, arrangement, and language of the Income Tax Bill, 2025, comes as a 
whiff of fresh air for the following reasons: 
Removal of obsolete provisions (whose time has run out) serves to considerably declutter the thick 
maze of law. 
In cases of dichotomy between the real purpose of a provision and its interpretation by taxpayers and 
courts alike, language has been made clearer to avoid future litigation and have certainty of outcomes. 
Wherever appropriate, provisions and rates have been captured in a tabular format in place of the 
current convoluted narrative. 
This Bill is a much-awaited comprehensive overhaul of a gargantuan piece of complex legislation which 
should be wholeheartedly embraced both by tax administrators and taxpayers in the right spirit. We now 
have a conducive and stable income tax structure matched by a law written in simpler, business-like 
language. If there is just one key takeaway from the Income Tax Bill, 2025, it has to be the need to 
eschew the temptation of nitpicking over every word, comma, and syntax to conveniently serve the 
needs of either the tax administrator or taxpayer. After all, the "ghost of West minister" (Inland Revenue 
vs Duke of West minister, 1936) where tax avoidance was seemingly given a "free pass" based on a 
literal interpretation of law, has been truly and fairly buried even in the country of its origin. There should 
be no reason, therefore, to continue with the overhang of a tax law conceived after India's first War of 
Independence and wasting valuable talent and resources in playing "wordsmith" over competing 
interpretations culminating in the long journey to courts of law. Indeed, if a fresh approach to interpreting 
and administrating the new law is adopted, it will truly be the dawn of a new era in the history of direct tax 
law in India.