Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 4

A wake-up call: On the growth forecast 
Policymakers must not make light of underwhelming growth numbers 
ven the most pessimistic economic forecasters did not anticipate the sharp downturn in          
economic momentum reflected in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) estimates for the 
July-September quarter. From a five-quarter low of 6.7% in the first quarter (Q1), most 
independent economists expected GDP growth of 6.5% in Q2, citing slackening urban 
demand indicators such as moderating GST revenue growth, and weak consumer 
durables' and non-durables' sales. The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), in its October review, pegged Q2 growth at 7%, while RBI officials 
projected a 6.8% uptick in an article soon after. Thatthe actual number came in at just 5.4% - the 
slowest since the third quarter of 2022-23 - with the Gross Value-Added (GVA) in the economy rising at 
a marginally better 5.6%, is, therefore, a significant shock. From a robust 8.2% GDP uptick last year, 
expectations of another year of 7%-plus growth in 2024-25 now appear precariously poised if not overtly 
optimistic, with the first half clocking just 6% growth. 
The RBI's MPC, which meets again this week, would certainly have to reorient its 7.2% growth forecast 
for the year, and may find it tougher to keep its focus on reining in inflation amid recent calls from 
Ministers to cut interest rates to support flailinggrowth impulses and investments. With inflation at a 15-
month high of 6.2% in October, the RBI, which is committed to wait for a durable decline in price rise 
before switching gears on rates, is unlikely to accede to these calls just yet. It may, at best, unveil 
measures to ease tight liquidity conditions. Mint Street czars have a tough tightrope walk ahead in the 
face of the growth slump. North Block officials have, however, sought to downplay the recent streak of 
weaker economic indicators, and termed the Q2 growth print a 'one-off' number due to an urban demand 
slack that should dissipate in the months ahead. While rural demand is expected to perk up the economy 
in the second half of the year, along with a relative ramp-up in public capex that has suffered so far this 
year - thanks to a Q1 pause due to the general election and tepid Q2 spends amid an extended 
monsoon - it may be too complacent to assume that urban consumption will rebound on its own and 
interest rates are the only constraint for growth. Poor wage increases and persistent price rise have 
caught up on urban wallets, and cannot be wished away. The Centre must shed its 'all is well' approach, 
and ring in fiscal measures, including cuts on fuel taxes and high GST rates on some items, to ease 
living costs and revive demand. 
E


Places and worship: On the Supreme Court hearing 
Supreme Court hearing may decide future of secularism in India 
 special Bench of the Supreme Court of India, headed by Chief Justice of India Sanjiv Khanna, 
will begin hearing on December 12 a batch of petitions that question the validity of the Places of 
Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991, a law that freezes the status of places of worship in the 
country as on the day of its independence and bars suits that seek to alter such status. It is no 
exaggeration to say these petitions pose a virulent challenge to the survival of secularism. The outcome 
may well decide the trajectory of communal relations and the future of secular thought in the country. 
The 1991 Act does have some exemptions: it did not apply to what was then the Babri Masjid-Ram 
Janmabhoomi dispute, which ended in favour of the Ram temple. Nor does it apply to monuments, sites 
and remains covered by the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958. It will 
also not apply to any suit that has been finally settled or disposed of, any dispute that has been settled 
by the parties before the 1991 Act came into force, or to the conversion of any place that took place by 
acquiescence. The challenge has come in the backdrop of a renewed attempt through motivated 
litigation by some Hindu organizations and devotees to target mosques such as the Gyanvapi mosque in 
Varanasi, the Shahi Idgah mosque in Mathura and the Shahi Jama Masjid in Sambhal, among others. 
Any order that strikes down or dilutes the 1991 law is likely to have a malign influence on these 
proceedings. 
The petitions highlight the demolition of temples by invaders in the past and contend that many mosques 
have been built on their ruins. The Places of Worship Act, they claim, legalises such depredations, and 
also violates the right of Hindus and other communities to reclaim their places of worship through legal 
proceedings. It also violates the right to practise and propagate religion and manage and administer 
places of worship. Ironically, they also contend that the Act goes against the principle of secularism, 
which would surely stand to be undermined if their attempts to reclaim these sites succeed. Fortunately, 
there are some clearly established principles in favour of the Act. In its Ayodhya judgment, a five-
member Bench observed that the law "imposes a non-derogable obligation towards enforcing our 
commitment to secularism". It also called it a "legislative intervention that preserves non-retrogression as 
an essential feature of our secular values". For the present, it does not seem likely that the Court will 
depart from the Constitution's secular vision and Parliament's mandate against misusing judicial fora to 
remedy historical wrongs. 
A