Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 29

Learning steps: On the Union Budget and education 
India must further strengthen its investment in school education 
esides some high-profile announcements, such as an AI Centre of Excellence for education 
with an allocation of ₹500 crore, broadband connectivity for schools, the expansion of five 
third-generation IITs, and increased funding for Indian knowledge systems, Budget 2025 has 
promised higher allocations for education compared to last year's revised estimates. There 
was a 7% increase for higher education, although the actual expenditure for 2023-24 was 
10% more than the 2025-26 Budget estimates. A key challenge in higher education is that 
the ambitious UGC reforms, modelled on advanced nations, require significant funding. For instance, 
introducing four-year degree programmes, allowing students to take courses across multiple institutions, 
implementing bi-annual admissions, and other structural changes demand substantial finances, which 
will inevitably fall upon State governments. However, Budget 2025 does not appear to adequately 
address these financial concerns. The release of the ASER 2024 report in the same week as the Union 
Budget highlighted gaps in India's school education system, particularly in foundational literacy and 
numeracy (FLN). While the report indicated that learning losses from the COVID-19 pandemic have been 
recovered, and, in some cases, FLN levels are at their highest ever, India still has some way to go before 
achieving full FLN, the 2026-27 target under the NIPUN Bharat scheme. 
Compared to the 2024-25 revised estimates (RE), school education has been allocated an additional 
₹11,000 crore, a 16% increase. However, as a percentage of the total Budget, this increase is only 0.12 
percentage points, bringing the allocation to 1.55%. In higher education, the Budget fraction remains 
unchanged at 0.99%. While institutions such as Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan continue to receive 
significant funding, the increase does reflect higher inflows to States, which are the primary 
implementers of school education programmes. The Centre has been keen on fully implementing the 
National Education Policy (NEP), which proposes a 5+3+3+4 system that includes five years of early 
education up to Class 3. Early education is being prioritized as the key to achieving full FLN, but a 
critical gap remains: the two years before Class 1 are managed by underpaid Angan wadi workers, who 
are already overburdened and often lack adequate training to deliver on FLN goals. A focused FLN 
drive is pivotal to achieving full FLN, a prerequisite for building a highly skilled workforce and 
leveraging India's demographic dividend. Over the next few years, depending on the progress made, 
the government must further strengthen school education investments to ensure India meets its full FLN 
target. Time is of the essence.


Green and clean: on India and a critical minerals framework 
India must formulate a critical minerals framework that is just and equitable 
India has come a long way in its attempt to transition to cleaner forms of power in the past 
decade. This is partly reflected in the budgetary allocation to the Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy between fiscal years 2015 (BE ₹1,535 crore) and 2025 (BE ₹32,626 crore). But these 
allocations, other than in 2015 and 2023, have been underutilized, leading to lower revised 
estimates (REs). However, this does not fully reflect the clean energy journey. India attempted a 
major leap with the PM-KUSUM scheme in 2019, a year ahead of the COVID-19 disruptions, with 
an outlay of ₹34,422 crore. The scheme envisaged having off-grid solar irrigation pumps and grid-
connected solar plants on fallow farmlands. While PM-KUSUM has received a tepid response, with less 
than half a gigawatt of installed capacity, the realization that energy transition is both a desirable 
outcome and a requirement occurred during the COVID-19 years, when there were major supply chain 
disruptions to coal, oil and gas. This led to India pledging to produce half its energy requirements from 
renewables in about five years from now, at COP26 in 2021. 
It was the 2021 Budget that heralded the clean energy shift, with ₹18,100 crore for a PLI scheme for 
advanced chemistry cell manufacturing to augment India's grid-scale battery storage capacity. A ₹4,500 
crore PLI scheme for solar photovoltaic modules went up to ₹19,500 crore in 2022. But the government 
also decided to levy a 40% basic customs duty (BCD) on solar modules and 25% on solar cells to 
reduce the overwhelming import dependence on China. However, this slowed solar power installations 
nationwide with prices rising. And even while renewables constitute 46% of India's total installed capacity 
(October 2024), 70% of its power output is from coal. Experts have pointed to the need for grid-scale 
battery storage technology to augment India's renewables output, as intermittent RE production leads 
to the continued reliance on fossil-fuel based power. With the realization that steep BCDs could be 
inflationary and counterproductive to localizing production, particularly in the capital-intensive lithium-
ion battery technology sector, the government has announced that it will exempt 12 critical minerals and 
35 capital goods from BCDs. But reducing dependence on China for energy transition resources and 
technology would also require India showing leadership in formulating a critical minerals framework, 
that is socially and environmentally just during extraction, and equitable in its distribution. With the U.S. 
withdrawing its leadership position in these areas, India must aim to play a bigger role.