Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 47

Diversify now: On India and looming economic risks 
India needs to expand its trading base to overcome global headwinds 
ebruary's sharp rise in the monthly services Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI), to 59, has 
provided a welcome relief to investors and policymakers, following the rise in GDP growth 
numbers, released by the National Statistical Office (NSO) for the December quarter of the 
current fiscal (Q3FY25). The strong rebound in the services PMI, up from 56.5 in January, 
which marked a 25-month low, helped offset the decline in the manufacturing PMI, which fell to 
a 14-month low of 56.3 in February. A PMI reading above 50 signals expansion, while anything 
below this indicates contraction. The PMI survey, conducted every month by S&P Global across over 
40 countries, is a key indicator of economic momentum. The fact that manufacturing and services - 
sectors that have accounted for about 80% of India's GDP since 2010 - remain in expansion mode is 
positive. This resilience persists despite capital outflows from Indian markets, suggesting that the 
country's economic fundamentals remain strong. A more telling indicator of long-term economic 
strength is the quarterly earnings of the Sensex, India's benchmark index comprising 30 of the most 
valued and actively traded companies on the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE). The Q3FY25 results point 
to solid net profit growth for nearly all firms. 
However, looming economic risks remain. The threat of reciprocal tariffs announced by United States 
President Donald Trump, and set to take effect on April 2, poses a challenge for the manufacturing 
sector. Meanwhile, the services sector is facing a different disruption: the rapid pivot to artificial 
intelligence (AI)-driven solutions. While the NSO reported 6.2% real GDP growth for Q3FY25, top 
executives from India's leading IT firms have, at an industry event in Mumbai, cautioned that growth in 
the sector could be as low as 5.1% in FY25, up from 3.8% in FY24. Although this may seem concerning 
for an industry that has enjoyed a 16% compounded annual growth rate for nearly 25 years, it still 
represents an increase of $29 billion, bringing the sector's expected value to $283 billion in FY25. In its 
2025 Strategic Review report, NASSCOM has identified geopolitical upheavals and rising tariffs as key 
challenges. But business leaders at the event attributed much of the slowdown to the disruptive impact of 
AI, which is reducing earnings from new contracts and reshaping hiring and training practices. India's 
services and manufacturing sectors face a triple challenge: rapid technological transformation, increasing 
global protectionism, and the potential for a U.S. recession. This could have significant repercussions 
for India, given that the U.S. remains its largest trading partner. To navigate these headwinds, India 
must urgently diversify its trading base.


Unsettling plans: On Trump's address to Congress and his policies 
Trump seems oblivious to the long-term consequences of his policies 
resident Donald Trump used the bully pulpit of his first joint address to Congress to 
emphasize, among other priorities, his administration's intent to up the ante on the trade war 
that began with the U.S. slamming India, China, Canada and Mexico with tariffs of 25% or 
higher. Amidst walkouts by numerous Democratic lawmakers, he flagged his administration's 
100 executive orders and 400 executive actions to date as proof of his "swift and unrelenting 
action", including on issues critical to American voters, such as reducing the cost of energy 
and "working tirelessly to end the savage conflict in Ukraine". Early on in the speech, Mr. 
Trump underscored the U.S.'s withdrawal from the Paris climate accords, WHO and the U.N. 
Human Rights Council, even as he reiterated his administration's commitment to the mantra of 
fossil fuel exploitation - "drill, baby, drill" - as the key approach to bringing down energy prices. He 
also railed against woke culture, specifically focusing on "getting men out of women's sports," as he had 
promised in his election campaign. In a hat tip to Elon Musk, the boss of the newly founded Department 
of Government Efficiency (DOGE), he claimed that the initiative had already "found hundreds of billions 
of dollars of fraud". This was notwithstanding shockwaves reverberating across the world from funding 
cuts and firings at organisations such as USAID, involved in critical projects in numerous countries; and 
lawsuits aimed at blocking DOGE's access to confidential government data. 
On the one hand, it is hardly surprising that Mr. Trump is pushing a conservative agenda, for example 
through his administration's aggressive drive towards smaller government. On the other, there is a 
serious question of whether some of his second-term policies risk self-goals. Tariffs are a case in point, 
as independent economists have argued that higher import costs resulting from increased tariffs could 
lead importers to pass the economic burden onto consumers through higher prices, driving inflation, 
contrary to his economic promises. However, this warning has largely fallen on deaf ears among MAGA 
supporters. Similarly, there is a distinct possibility of the U.S. saving resources and materials of war if it 
"pauses" military support to Ukraine, yet this strategy does not apparently concern itself with the longer-
term, possibly trans-Atlantic, consequences of signalling weakness of defence against Russian territorial 
ambitions looming over Europe. While the 2024 election revealed the depth of the partisan chasm 
between sections of American voters over crucial, emotive issues such as immigration, reproductive 
rights, and the economy, the tone and tenor of the second Trump administration does not instil 
confidence that this gap might be bridged in four years.