Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 53

Greater regularity: On the Nipah virus 
Genetic sequences of Nipah virus must be shared in public databases quickly 
The case of a 42-year-old woman in Kerala testing positive for Nipah virus on May 8 makes it 
the third such instance being reported from the State's Malappuram district in the last two 
years. The earlier cases were detected last year, in a 14-year-old boy on July 21 and a 24-
year-old adult on September 15. With the latest detection of Nipah in the State, Kerala has 
recorded two outbreaks, in the years 2018 and 2023, involving human-to-human transmission, 
and four spillovers in the years 2019 and 2021, and two events in 2024. In the May 8 event, even though 
only one person tested positive for Nipah and seven close contacts tested negative, it is a bit early to call 
it a spillover. Unlike an outbreak, Nipah spillovers are restricted to a single case with no human-to-
human transmission. One reason for the absence of human spread is the timely detection of the case 
and isolation of the patient. The other reason is the clinical presentation. In the case of Nipah virus 
spillovers, patients who tested positive for the virus had presented with acute encephalitis syndrome 
(AES), while in the Nipah outbreaks in 2018 and 2023, the index case and at least a few other infected 
people had presented with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Compared with AES, patients 
with ARDS present with relatively severe conditions with lung involvement. Besides cough, patients 
presenting with ARDS have higher viral loads, which serve as a surrogate for disease severity. 
Immaterial of whether blood, urine or cerebrospinal fluid samples test positive or not, throat swab 
samples generally test positive if a person is infected by the Nipah virus, which again serve as an 
indicator of human spread in the case of patients with ARDS. The high viral load, the presence of virus in 
the throat and the tendency to cough make human spread possible. Greater disease severity in ARDS 
cases is also the reason for the Nipah deaths in 2018 and 2023. There were 17 deaths from 18 cases in 
the 2018 outbreak, and two deaths from six cases in the 2023 outbreak. A study by the ICMR-National 
Institute of Virology (NIV) Pune found that the 2018 Nipah virus had small genetic variations from the 
Bangladesh strain and was able to cause multisystemic disease in a Syrian hamster model resembling 
human infection. 
The Nipah virus is capable of causing different clinical presentations and is endowed with the ability to 
cause human spread in some cases. This makes a strong case for a quick and thorough genetic study of 
the virus in humans and bats. With Nipah cases now a very regular occurrence in Kerala, the compulsion 
to routinely study fruit bats, which are natural hosts for Nipah, cannot be overemphasised. That even the 
2018 virus showed small genetic differences from the Bangladesh strain makes it even more important to 
know whether the virus causing the spillovers without human spread has evolved further. Such studies 
T 

            can be done by more scientists only when the genetic sequences are shared in public databases without 
any delay.


Big deal: On the U.S.-China trade deal 
The U.S.-China trade deal will have implications for India 
The trade agreement between the U.S. and China, the two biggest economies in the world, 
serves as a breather in an otherwise tense global trade environment. The U.S. has agreed to 
temporarily lower, for 90 days, its overall tariffs on Chinese goods from 145% to 30%, while 
China will cut its tariffs on American imports from 125% to 10%. Markets across the world 
cheered the announcement, jumping between 2%-3.8% following the news. The thaw comes 
on the back of tensions and tariffs being ratcheted up by both sides, starting with U.S. President Donald 
Trump's February 1 announcement of a varying tariff on imports from China, Mexico and Canada. 
Notably, he excluded China from the 90-day pause on 'reciprocal' tariffs announced in early April. One 
way to look at this latest development is that it shows Mr. Trump is backing down from his tariff war-
footing, acknowledging the importance of China to the U.S. economy. Indeed, the joint statement by both 
countries begins by mentioning "the importance of their bilateral economic and trade relationship". 
However, another view is that his heavy-handed approach has succeeded in convincing China to come 
to the negotiation table. Tariffs of 145% were unsustainable but served their purpose. The fact also is 
that Mr. Trump's main grievance, of a ballooning trade deficit with China, remains unaddressed. The two 
sides have agreed to continue talks, which will be key in determining whether this seemingly intractable 
problem can be worked around or result in tensions again. 
For India, this brings both uncertainties and certainties. If further talks between the U.S. and China are 
successful, investors who have moved to other countries will likely start viewing China favourably again. 
The advantages of manufacturing there - scale and costs - are still significant. The China+1 model, 
which India in any case has not been able to leverage adequately, might start to lose its sheen. The 
other uncertainty is around India's own trade talks with the U.S. It has now informed the World Trade 
Organisation of potential reciprocal measures to the U.S.'s increased duties on steel and aluminium 
imports. Even though talks on a U.S.-India trade deal are ongoing, this latest statement shows that 
tensions remain high. The certainties are two-fold. The first is that India's trade deficit with China remains 
vast and rising, and the U.S.-China agreement will not reduce this. 'Make in India' is currently inextricably 
linked to 'Import from China'. The second certainty carries over from the first. The Centre must lean 
heavily on States to adopt labour and land reforms that can allow scalable manufacturing to become 
cost-effective here. Without this, India will remain dependent on Chinese imports, regardless of its 
dealings with the rest of the world. 
T