Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 6

Death by contamination: on Indian cities and unsafe drinking water 
Governments need to ensure safety of piped supply of water while widening coverage 
s policymakers prioritise universal access to potable water, the death of three persons last 
week in Chennai due to suspected consumption of contaminated piped water is a reminder 
that coverage is not the only problem: even urban centres with a long history of piped supply 
are still not assured of potable water that is free from dangerous contamination. The incident, 
which involved drinking water supplied through the State agency in suburban Pallavaram, also sent 34 
people to hospital with complaints of diarrhoea. The laboratory test reports of local water samples are yet 
to be made public, and it may be too early to blame the agency. Nonetheless, the remarks of State 
Minister T.M. Anbarasan, accusing the affected people of not maintaining hygiene in their surroundings, 
come across as insensitive and irresponsible. Irrespective of the cause, it is concerning that severe 
contamination of water continues to occur with greater periodicity in cities in India. In the past six months, 
large-scale outbreaks of health episodes due to consumption of water containing E.coli have been 
reported in cities including Bengaluru, Kochi, Noida and Vizianagaram. This exposes the challenge of 
catering to the basic needs of people, who are increasingly shifting to cities and living in congested 
environs, putting the water and drainage infrastructure under strain. 
Governments face a challenge in providing safe drinking water in a tropical country such as India. Data 
from the Jal Shakti Ministry show that arsenic has been detected in groundwater in parts of 230 districts 
in 25 States and fluoride in 469 districts in 27 States. In 2022, according to the World Health 
Organization, at least 1.7 billion people, globally, used a drinking water source contaminated with faeces. 
Worldwide, an estimated one million people die annually from diarrhoea caused by unsafe drinking 
water, sanitation and hand hygiene. In 2010, the United Nations General Assembly had explicitly 
recognized the human right to water and sanitation. Towards this end, addressing the issue of chemical 
pollution of groundwater is also non-negotiable. Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M.K. Stalin is cognizant of 
this. Ahead of the last Assembly elections, he had unveiled his 10-year vision statement for seven 
priority areas to facilitate development of Tamil Nadu. This included promises to increase the annual per 
capita drinking water supply from nine lakh litres to 10 lakh litres; reduce wastage of water from 50% to 
15%; and increase distribution of recycled water from 5% to 20%. Now, he needs to walk the talk, 
especially in terms of supplying safe drinking water. 
A


Wide aisle: On the Opposition versus the Rajya Sabha Chairman 
Parliament must remain the forum for airing the views of all representatives 
In a move that is unprecedented in India's parliamentary history, 60 Members of the Rajya Sabha 
have expressed a loss of confidence in the Chairman, Jagdeep Dhankhar, who is also the Vice-
President of India. These Members of Parliament, from the Opposition, have given notice for a 
resolution seeking his removal from office. The resolution is unlikely to face a vote, and will be 
defeated if it does. But that is beside the point. What is real and damaging for democracy is the trust 
deficit between the Chair and the Opposition members. Mr. Dhankhar's rulings and his public statements 
have been cited by the Opposition as proof of his partisanship. Mr. Dhankhar's decision to allow 
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MPs to speak on the subject of an adjournment motion that he himself had 
rejected on December 9 was the final trigger for the extreme step by the Opposition. These members 
also see, among other things, a pattern of the Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha, Mallikarjun 
Kharge, being disallowed to speak, and Mr. Dhankhar publicly amplifying views of the government and 
berating those of the Opposition. Most often, it is career politicians who are elected, through a partisan 
contest, to supposedly apolitical positions such as President, Vice-President and Speaker of the Lok 
Sabha. Once in office, they largely stay above the fray. Hence, the notice for a no-confidence motion 
against the Rajya Sabha Chairman marks an unfortunate turn for democracy. 
It is no coincidence that all this comes against the backdrop of a constant campaign by the BJP to shrink 
the Opposition space. Criticism of the government is portrayed as an anti-national act, and institutions 
and individuals are often targeted through insinuations. There is little engagement between the BJP and 
the Opposition. If Parliament merely becomes yet another platform for political diatribe, it will erode 
rather than reinforce democracy. The message from parliamentary proceedings to the citizenry should 
be that the government is sensitive to their voices. The government's defence of Mr. Dhankhar included 
a reference to his caste, and condemnation of the principal Opposition party, with the insinuation that it 
was anti-India. While the government gets its way by virtue of its majority, the Opposition must have its 
say. When Parliament is held hostage to hostility between the government and the Opposition, the Chair 
is expected to mediate and find a way forward. This role of the Chair is possible only when its occupant 
is neutral and seen as such. Regardless of the merit of the grievances, the Chairman could take a 
proactive approach to reassure his critics that he is above the political fray for the sake of institutional 
integrity. 
I