Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 81

Influencing interlocutors: On Operation Sindoor, India's delegations 
The delegations projected a united image of pluralistic India 
The seven Indian delegations of mostly Members of Parliament and some former diplomats, 
tasked by the government to carry diplomatic messages after Operation Sindoor, have 
completed their travels. The 59 members visited 32 countries to convey the country's position 
on the outrage felt over the Pahalgam terror attack and its links to Pakistan, the restrained and 
precise nature of Indian strikes on Pakistan's terrorist infrastructure, and the "new normal" the 
government has adopted for terrorist strikes. The message was meant not just for foreign governments 
but also for lawmakers, the foreign media and the general public, especially in countries where New 
Delhi has felt it has not found the expected support. Many of the countries visited are members of the UN 
Security Council (UNSC), and include those which are elected non-permanent members or will join next 
year. This is important as India faced a diplomatic setback when Pakistan, an elected UNSC member for 
2025-26, was able to amend the UNSC statement to omit references to The Resistance Front (TRF) that 
had claimed responsibility for the Pahalgam attack. That Pakistan managed to be chosen Chair of the 
Taliban Sanctions committee and Vice-Chair of the UN Counter-terrorism Committee will make India's 
task of holding the terrorists responsible for the attack accountable through UN designations and at the 
Financial Action Task Force more difficult. Another area of focus was the membership of the 
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation that has been particularly critical of India. Finally, the focus on the 
U.S. was pointed, where the delegation visited New York and Washington. This may have stemmed from 
the appearance that ties with Washington are strained over President Donald Trump's persistent claim 
that he had mediated the ceasefire between India and Pakistan, using trade ties as a leverage to avert a 
"nuclear conflict". 
It remains to be seen just how successful these tours of political diplomacy have been, given criticism in 
India that more time was spent speaking to the Indian diaspora, and giving interviews to the 
accompanying Indian media rather than in influencing interlocutors abroad. The delegations also had to 
contend with a copy-cat move from Pakistan to counter the Indian narrative. However, the overarching 
message of the delegations, comprising representatives from a number of Indian States, faiths and 
political parties, is a powerful one - of Indian unity and consensus on the issue of national security. At a 
time when the Modi government is under criticism internationally for "democratic decline" and increasing 
majoritarianism, New Delhi chose its messengers wisely, with a view to projecting abroad a positive and 
pluralistic image of a country that was resolute against terrorism. 
T


Falling short: on India's EV journey 
India must ensure technology transfer in the EV segment 
In June 2, India took a turn for the better in its transport electrification journey by offering a 
concessional import duty of 15% on completely built-up units. This is contingent on the EV 
manufacturer investing a minimum of about ₹4,150 crore over three years to localise 
manufacturing in India, with a base domestic value add of 25% in three years, going up to 
50% in another two years. The notification, under the Scheme to Promote Manufacturing of 
Electric Passenger Cars in India (SPMEPCI) announced in March 2024, allows for a maximum import of 
8,000 completely built units annually for each manufacturer for five years. The SPMEPCI adds to the 
bouquet of policies that attempts to boost EV adoption and manufacturing. However, these policies put 
together fall short of addressing a pressing issue in India's journey to decarbonise and transform mobility 
- technology transfer. India began this journey in 2015, about five years later than most large 
economies. An outlay of ₹895 crore for the Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric 
Vehicles in India (FAME) scheme, for five years, expanded to ₹10,000 crore in 2019. China announced 
its ambitious New Energy Vehicle subsidy programme in 2009, which, coupled with mandatory joint 
venture manufacturing of EVs until 2022, enabled technology transfer. 
In addition, a reduced import duty on EVs (25% in 2010 to 15% in 2018), and cumulative incentives of 
about $230 billion in the past 15 years - the most by any country - enabled China to achieve the 
highest global EV adoption rate. This also supported rapid charging infrastructure deployment, making 
China the largest producer and consumer of EVs. The U.S. began this journey in 2010 with an initial 
outlay of $25 billion for its Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing Loans Program. This was 
greatly expanded under the Biden administration's Inflation Reduction Act. But its EV adoption rate is 
much lower than China's. In 2024, out of 17 million global EV car sales, China alone accounted for 11.3 
million, followed by Europe with 3.2 million, the U.S. with another 1.5 million, and the rest of the world 
accounting for the remainder. China's vertical integration of battery manufacturing, from mining, 
processing to assembling, has aided economies of scale with competitive pricing of EVs against 
conventional ICE vehicles. For now, the 25% DVA that India could aim for under the just announced 
scheme would be repurposing locally made auto components meant for ICE vehicles to EVs and layering 
it with Software-as-a-service. But to obtain the crucial technology for the heart of the EV - its battery - 
India must replicate its approach to localising ICE manufacturing, which is to mandate joint ventures with 
local ICE or EV makers, and gradually allow for a complete open market. 
O