Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 69

Carrot and stick: On the U.S. and Iran talks 
The 2015 accord must be revived to prevent Iran going nuclear 
The U.S. and Iran are currently engaged in rare high-stakes diplomacy. They have held two 
rounds of talks, in Muscat and in Rome, with Oman as the mediator, about Tehran's nuclear 
programme. A third technical round has been confirmed for the coming days. However, 
tensions still remain high between the Trump administration and the Islamic Republic. It was 
Donald Trump, during his first term, who sabotaged a functioning multilateral agreement that 
had significantly curtailed Iran's nuclear programme. Ever since, Iran has accelerated its nuclear 
activities. While it has not yet decided to build a nuclear bomb, most assessments agree that it has the 
capability to do so within weeks. At the same time, Iran's regional influence stands diminished as a result 
of Israel's attacks on its so-called axis of resistance and other regional shifts such as the fall of Syria's 
Assad regime. Israel is pressing for an attack on Iran's nuclear facilities, but Mr. Trump, according to 
American reports, has vetoed those plans, for now. 
Mr. Trump has adopted a classic carrot-and-stick approach. He said he wanted a deal with Iran but with 
a warning that if talks failed, there would be bombing. He has also launched a massive aerial campaign 
against Yemen's Iran-aligned Houthis. In addition, the U.S. has ramped up its military presence in West 
Asia besides moving B-2 bombers to the Indian Ocean region - all aimed at signalling to Iran that U.S. 
threats should be taken seriously. But despite the combined military might of the U.S. and Israel, any 
attack on Iran would be catastrophic for regional security and global economy. Iran's nuclear facilities are 
scattered and underground, making them extremely difficult to destroy. It was precisely because there 
was no viable military solution to the Iran nuclear issue that world powers chose the path of diplomacy in 
2015, a path Mr. Trump had abandoned in 2018 for no good reason. Nevertheless, despite the 
challenges and geopolitical pressure, the recent initiation of talks by Mr. Trump and Iran opens a rare 
window of opportunity to resolve the issue once and for all. For diplomacy to succeed, the U.S. should 
act as a responsible global power that is committed to preventing weaponisation of Iran's nuclear 
programme, rather than as a partisan patron seeking to destroy Iran on Israel's behalf. Iran, for its part, 
has signalled that it was open to scaling back its nuclear activities in exchange for the removal of 
sanctions and threats. The 2015 agreement, which limited Iran's enrichment capabilities and uranium 
stockpile, could serve as a reference point for a deal if talks progress constructively.


Unity and resolve: On the Pahalgam terror attack 
India must remain firm and focused in the face of terror 
The massacre of 26 people, most of them tourists, in Pahalgam, Kashmir, by Islamist terrorists 
has jolted the conscience of the nation and the world. It is a tragic reminder of the constant 
threat of terrorism, which strikes without warning at innocent civilians. The mind-numbing 
reports of the attackers identifying victims by religion before executing them at close range 
mark a new low in the history of Pakistan-sponsored terrorism. Home Minister Amit Shah, who 
visited the attack site, asserted that "Bharat won't bend to terrorism," while Prime Minister Narendra Modi 
curtailed his visit to Saudi Arabia to return to New Delhi. India must speak in one voice in this period of 
national calamity. It is imperative to avoid internal divisions that could threaten social cohesion. The unity 
of the Indian people is the most potent antidote to terror instigated from across the border. Amid the 
horror, a local Muslim man tried to shield the tourists but lost his own life in the process. Widespread 
protests across Kashmir following the incident also signalled a rejection of such violence by ordinary 
citizens. The victims hailed from all parts of India, reflecting the diversity of those who were drawn to 
Kashmir as it re-emerged as a favoured tourist destination. The attack has disrupted not just lives, but 
also livelihoods in a region economically dependent on tourism. 
New Delhi's response must address the people of Kashmir, the broader Indian public, Pakistan, and the 
international community. Since 2019, India has followed a new policy approach in Kashmir, 
strengthening infrastructure and connectivity to integrate the region more closely with the rest of the 
country. Yet, the broader global environment has grown more volatile, with internal instability and 
international conflicts on the rise. India's strategy must be guided by realism grounded in national interest 
and devoid of empty rhetoric as it seeks to isolate Pakistan, whose export of terrorism is predicated on 
the two-nation theory and Hindu-Muslim hostility. The national resolve must be firm and focused in the 
face of terror as the government does everything possible to swiftly bring the perpetrators to justice.