Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 103

A long list: on the U.S., designation of The Resistance Front group 
The designation of TRF as a terrorist group should put more pressure on Pakistan 
The decision of the U.S. to designate The Resistance Front (TRF) group that claimed 
responsibility for the Pahalgam terror attack in April 2025, as a Foreign Terrorist Organization 
(FTO) and a Specially Designated Global Terrorist is a development that should undergird 
the global fight against terror. The Ministry of External Affairs has called it "a timely and 
important step". For one, the U.S. State Department has acknowledged the severity of the 
Pahalgam attack. It also names the TRF as a "front and proxy" for the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), which 
Pakistan claims it has rendered "defunct". Even though the U.S. added groups such as the LeT and the 
Jaish-e-Mohammad to its FTO list in 2001, they have masterminded attacks in India since then. The U.S. 
has also partially made amends for the TRF's name having been kept out of the UN Security Council 
(UNSC) resolution condemning the Pahalgam attack, apparently at Pakistan's behest, but with the 
concurrence of the U.S. and other P-5 members.  
It is hoped that the designation will now help India's case in designating the TRF at the UNSC, under the 
1267 Committee for sanctions, also strengthening the trans-national legal pursuit of those behind the 
attack. While this is a positive step, it is necessary to put the Trump's administration's other actions since 
the Pahalgam attack into perspective. After India launched Operation Sindoor, the U.S. has countered 
India's narrative on the four-day conflict on several occasions. Mr. Trump, as well as Secretary of State 
Marco Rubio, have repeatedly made the claim that the U.S. negotiated the India-Pakistan ceasefire, and 
averted a nuclear conflict by using trade ties as leverage - an equivalence which Pakistan has been 
happy to endorse.  
Mr. Trump's unprecedented White House lunch and praise for the Pakistan military chief, Field Marshal 
Asim Munir, came hours after the government had said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi had cleared 
the picture with Mr. Trump, and brings into question just how much pressure the U.S. is willing to put on 
Pakistan to act against terrorism. The Trump administration had held out the promise of doing more to 
support India in its fight against terrorism by fast-tracking the extradition, in April, of Tahawwur Hussain 
Rana, who was wanted by India for the 2008 Mumbai attacks. It is hoped that the TRF's listing means 
that the U.S. is recommitting to that objective. Given that the real challenge lies more in credibly ending 
Pakistan's support to these groups, New Delhi must focus on its efforts, diplomatic as well as legal, to 
ensure justice for the victims and to ____________further terrorist acts. 
T


All in one: On the Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana scheme 
Agriculture needs more public spending, not just one umbrella scheme 
The Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana (PMDDKY), a scheme approved by the 
Union Cabinet, is to be implemented through the convergence of 36 existing schemes across 
11 Departments. According to Union Agriculture Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan, the scheme 
seeks to address the "disparities in productivity" between States, and even among districts 
within a State. The Centre's pet schemes such as the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi 
(PM-KISAN) and the PM Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) as well as relevant State schemes, to be identified 
by the District Dhan Dhaanya Samitis, will be subsumed in the PMDDKY. Local partnerships with the 
private sector will also be promoted under the proposed scheme, which will begin in October during the 
rabi crop season. The scheme is to get an annual outlay of ₹24,000 crore for six years. Modelled on 
NITI Aayog's Aspirational Districts Programme, the Centre will identify 100 districts based on low 
productivity and cropping intensity and less credit disbursement.  
The hope is that the scheme will result in higher productivity, value addition in agriculture and allied 
sectors, local livelihood creation, leading to increased domestic production and self-reliance. This 
convergence of schemes must be viewed in the background of decreasing public spending on 
agriculture. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture, in the latest report on Demands for 
Grants, had observed a continuous decline, from 3.53% in 2021-22 to 3.14% (2022-23), 2.57% (2023-
24), 2.54% (2024-25) and 2.51% (2025-26), of the allocations for agriculture as a percentage of total 
Central Plan outlay. This aggregation of all schemes under one umbrella suggests that the 
Government wants uniformity in running the welfare, financial and technical schemes in the agriculture 
sector. It is keen to add States' measures too in the new scheme.  
It remains to be seen how effective such uniformity will be on the ground as further decrease in public 
investment in agriculture could be disastrous. Private-public partnerships should be for the larger good 
of self-reliance, particularly in the production of foodgrains, edible oil and pulses. The progress of area 
coverage under kharif crops, released last week, points to a decrease in the sowing of oil seeds and 
popular pulses. Though it promotes national uniformity, it is welcome that the new scheme will function 
based on 'District Plans' that will be aligned to the national goals of crop diversification, conservation of 
water and soil health, self-sufficiency in agriculture and allied sectors. For the PMDDKY, the Centre will 
monitor 117 key indicators of progress on a monthly basis. But to make it more participatory, States, 
local self-governments, primary agriculture cooperative societies, agriculture universities and 
organisations of farmers and traders must be involved in this process. 
T