Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 110

A productive visit: On India-China ties 
India and China seem ready to put behind the memory of Galwan clashes 
udging by the statements and readouts from both sides, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi's two-
day visit to India this week was extremely productive. While Mr. Wang was in Delhi at the 
invitation of NSA Ajit Doval for the 24th Special Representatives talk on the boundary question, he 
also met External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar for bilateral talks and the normalization process 
after the four-year military standoff at the Line of Actual Control. Mr. Wang was also received by 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi who said that he would travel to Tianjin for the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organisation (SCO) meeting. Mr. Modi will meet with Chinese President Xi Jinping. In Delhi, India and 
China agreed to resume border trade at three points, restart direct flights, expand the Kailash 
Manasarovar yatra slots for pilgrims and relax visas. While there were positive discussions on the lifting 
of export restrictions by China on fertilizers, rare earth products and boring machinery, it is unclear 
whether there was headway on China's demand that India lift its scrutiny of Chinese FDI in Indian 
companies. The two sides agreed to expedite the process of boundary resolution of the 3,500 km India-
China border. Significantly, the Modi government agreed to build on the 2005 agreement of Political 
Parameters and Guiding Principles for the Settlement of the India-China Boundary Question.  
Meanwhile, the Chinese Ambassador Xu Feihong said that China opposes the U.S.'s "bully" move of 
imposing 50% tariffs on India. The outcomes indicate that Delhi has decided it can now "move ahead" 
from the PLA transgressions, Galwan clashes and the standoff. While Mr. Doval said that the "borders 
have been quiet", the government was made uncomfortably aware that even with a stable border, other 
long-standing problems will continue to shadow ties. Mr. Wang later left for Kabul to work with Pakistan 
and the Taliban on a plan to extend the BRI and China-Pakistan Economic Corridor - India is opposed 
to both - into Afghanistan. He then flew to Islamabad for a strategic dialogue with his Pakistani 
counterparts. China's diplomatic support to Pakistan after the Pahalgam attacks and during Operation 
Sindoor did not come up during Mr. Wang's visit, but provide an ominous overhang to ties, as did 
Ambassador Xu's contention that Pakistan too is a victim of terrorism. While the U.S.'s attack on Indian 
trade and economy may be spurring New Delhi's efforts, the reset with China must not come from a 
perceived position of weakness, and the next steps must be taken keeping in focus the strategic 
challenge. 
J


Sedition redux: On trampling on press freedom 
New sedition law threatens freedom of expression further 
iling frivolous cases against publications and summoning journalists without proper 
investigation or perusal of material evidence have become a part of the police playbook in 
States ruled by vindictive politicians who brook no criticism. The Assam Police's decision to 
reportedly summon the founding editor Siddharth Varadarajan and consulting editor Karan 
Thapar of The Wire under Section 152, among others, of the BNS, is yet another case of the 
state trampling on press freedom. The fact that the summons were issued by the Guwahati 
Crime Branch to the journalists in a fresh sedition FIR on the same day, August 12, 2025, when 
the Supreme Court had issued notice on The Wire's petition challenging the constitutional validity of the 
new sedition law (Section 152) and had protected them from any "coercive action" by the Assam Police, 
makes these actions egregious. The summons, apart from another one related to a case registered at 
the Morigaon Police Station, seem to pertain to a report in The Wire on Operation Sindoor. The Wire has 
also pointed to other disturbing issues - the summons do not carry the FIR date or provide any details 
of the alleged offence or include a copy of the FIR - all of which are mandatory according to the BNSS 
sections associated with the summons. In addition, keeping the FIRs secret and not mentioning the 
reasons for the summons hint at police intimidation. 
Critics of Section 152 had rightly feared that it was a rebranded version of the colonial-era sedition law, 
whose cases the Court had kept in abeyance in 2022. Section 152 has even more expansive and 
dangerous provisions, setting the bar much lower for prosecution than the previous sedition law. Terms 
such as "knowingly" could allow for prosecution even where there was no malicious intent to cause harm, 
unlike Section 124A's strict requirement to prove clear intent to incite disaffection. The vague language 
around "sovereignty, unity, and integrity of India" provides dangerous latitude to law enforcement 
agencies. Even legitimate acts such as criticism of government policy could be construed as 
"endangering unity". Without clear definitions or safeguards, Section 152 can target individuals for merely 
expressing opinions that authorities deem threatening. This law's invocation against journalists 
questioning government narratives creates a chilling effect on press freedom. The Court's intervention in 
The Wire's case, to examine Section 152's constitutional validity while protecting journalists from 
coercive action, acknowledges the potential for abuse. However, the Assam Police's defiant response 
suggests that without stronger judicial oversight and clearer guidelines, Section 152 will continue to be 
weaponized against dissent. The onus now lies on the Court to recognize the unconstitutionality of the 
sedition laws, in their earlier form or rebranded, which have no place in a democratic society. 
F