Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 97

Editorial                                                      July 31, 2025 
Arrest and unrest: On arrest of nuns in 
Chhattisgarh   
Communal agenda is behind the arrest of nuns 
for human trafficking 
The arrest of two Catholic nuns by the Chhattisgarh 
police on charges of human trafficking and forced 
conversion is another instance of growing religion-
related harassment. Keralite Sisters Preeti Mary and 
Vandana Francis, from the order of the Assisi Sisters of 
Mary Immaculate, were escorting three tribal girls to an 
Agra convent for jobs when they were apprehended from 
Durg railway station on July 25, 2025, after a Bajrang Dal 
member filed a complaint. They have been booked under 
Section 4 of the Chhattisgarh Freedom of Religion Act, 
1968 (conversion) and Section 143 of the BNS (trafficking). 
While Chief Minister Vishnu Deo Sai insisted that the nuns 
were engaging in "human trafficking and conversion... 
through inducement", the kin of the girls have since 
clarified that there was no forceful conversion and they 
had given their consent to be taken to Agra. The arrests 
T

Editorial                                                      July 31, 2025 
have led to condemnation across the political spectrum 
against communal vigilantism. Leaders across political 
lines have protested. Ruling Left Democratic Front and 
Opposition United Democratic Front MPs from Kerala held 
dharnas outside Parliament, and the Catholic Church, 
through its official mouthpiece, Deepika, and other church 
organisations too denounced the arrests. 
This is not the first time that a proselytisation row has 
erupted involving Christian missionaries. Last year marked 
25 years of the brutal killing of Australian missionary 
Graham Staines and his two minor sons in Odisha. Despite 
the fact that the Constitution provides citizens the right to 
practise and propagate the religion of their choice, several 
States, including U.P., M.P., Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Odisha, have misused 
provisions of anti-conversion laws that were intended only 
to prevent conversion through force or fraud or 
allurement. These laws are often used to criminalize 
interfaith marriages by labelling conversion by marriage as 
unlawful. In tribal-dominated regions such as Jharkhand, 
there is another tension brewing between Adivasis and 
both Christian tribals and Hindus. While Hindutva groups 

Editorial                                                      July 31, 2025 
with the RSS's backing are exhorting tribals to wake up to 
their Hindu roots, tribal outfits are resisting this and 
demanding a separate Sarna religious code. Tribal outfits 
allege that the Hindu groups are doing the same thing as 
Christian missionaries to subsume their distinct culture. In 
Chhattisgarh, which has around a 2% Christian population 
according to the 2011 Census, there is also a debate on 
whether tribals who are converting to Christianity should 
be delisted from the Scheduled Tribes. In such a churn, the 
onus is on political, religious and social organisations to 
focus on economic development, jobs and welfare. 
Government machineries should be used to enforce 
rights, guaranteed by the Constitution, not violate them.


Editorial                                                      July 30, 2025 
Deaths in school: On the state of 
government schools 
Infrastructure of government schools need 
urgent attention 
In July 25, 2025, tragedy awaited students of 
Classes 6 and 7 at the Piplodi Government School 
in 
Rajasthan's 
Jhalawar 
district 
as 
they 
assembled for prayer. A part of their school building gave 
way leading to the deaths of seven and injuries to several 
others. Most of the students were from tribal 
communities. The school is in the southeastern part of the 
State bordering Madhya Pradesh. There was a similar 
incident the next day in Nagaur district but the school was 
closed being a holiday. There has been much public anger 
in the State over the incidents which, quite rightly, have 
thrown the spotlight on the state of government schools. 
As in UDISE 2023-24 data, there are more than 70,000 
government schools in Rajasthan serving nearly 84 lakh 
students, especially from the poorer and marginalised 
sections. Of these, some 8,000 schools have been 
O 

Editorial                                                      July 30, 2025 
estimated by the Education Department to be in a poor 
condition. The Jhalawar school was not among the schools 
identified as being in a poor state, indicating the extent of 
the problems. Some ₹650 crore had been allocated in the 
past two State budgets for boosting the infrastructure but 
inefficiencies in government have ensured that the 
measures did not make much difference. Fixing the 
infrastructure of government schools should be a priority 
for the State's Bharatiya Janata Party government. 
The tragedy in Rajasthan should serve as a wake-up call 
across India, given the current policy defocus on 
government-owned education institutions. The National 
Education Policy (NEP) 2020 had called for an immediate 
increase in spending on education, from some 4.6% of 
GDP to 6%, identifying one-time spends on infrastructure 
as the lead priority besides identifying other sectors for a 
boost in support. Five years into the NEP, there is little to 
suggest that this has been a focus area for governments, 
Union or State. Policy thrusts have been more towards 
reducing 
government 
support, 
self-financing, 
and 
encouraging private sector contribution. While these may 
be applicable to higher education, basic school education 

Editorial                                                      July 30, 2025 
is a primary duty of the government - as it is across the 
world including in the most developed nations. Setting up 
model schools and funding them to serve as exemplars 
cannot be at the cost of mass school education. 
Foundational Literacy and Numeracy has been identified 
as a critical area for boosting workforce productivity and 
reaping the demographic dividend that will soon run its 
course as India's population ages. But the discourse on 
pathways towards achieving them is more on pedagogy, 
non-formal teaching and so on than the essentials - an 
infrastructure boost and teacher recruitment and training.