Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 68

Water blight: On the Srisailam tunnel cave-in 
Scientific risk assessment prior to undertaking tunnel work is a must 
arely a week after the remains of nine coal miners were recovered at the end of a 44-day 
operation, from a coal mine that had flooded in Assam in early January, a disaster of similar 
contours, this time in Nagarkurnool, Telangana, is in the making. A portion of the Srisailam 
Left Bank Canal tunnel, which is under construction, collapsed on February 22, 2025 leaving 
eight workers trapped. What is known so far is that a three-metre section of the roof collapsed 
due to water seepage. The roof collapse eventually led to the tunnel crumbling over a stretch 
of eight metres. Despite nine specialized rescue teams, drawn from the Centre and the State 
governments, working round-the-clock, no significant progress has been made so far on ascertaining the 
condition of the workers and in devising an optimal rescue plan. So far, the playbook that is being 
experimented with seems to be inspired by the successful rescue work in the Silkyara Tunnel collapse in 
Uttarkashi, Uttarakhand, in November 2023, where a portion of the four -kilometre-long tunnel that was 
being constructed collapsed, stranding 41 workers. It took a 16-day operation that started out with a 
variety of approaches, including drilling horizontally, and later on vertically, from both ends of the tunnel 
to reach the stranded workers. In the end, key breakthroughs were achieved by a team of 'rat hole' 
miners from Assam, who use manual excavation methods that are considered hazardous and deemed 
illegal. 
The key difference between the Silkyara episode and the one in Srisailam is the presence of water. 
There were 70 workers in the tunnel when a deluge of water and muck suddenly began to gush inside. 
Barring the eight, the rest escaped, with 13 of them sustaining injuries. However, in the subsequent 
days, it is the torrential flow that has proved to be a barrier to rescue operations. The history of tunnel-
linked disasters globally shows that while rare, they can often be catastrophic. A large proportion of 
these accidents, studies show, are due to a rupture in aquifers (underground water channels). It is to 
determine such risks that extensive studies are commissioned to understand the sub-surface geology 
of a site. A report by the Uttarakhand disaster management authority on the Silkyara episode says that 
there was insufficient analysis of the rock formations at Silkyara but also that a complete picture of 
structural deformities cannot be known before tunnelling. While the rescue of the trapped personnel at 
the Srisailam tunnel is paramount, there has to be a proper investigation by the authorities on the 
reasons for the collapse and action taken, if evidence emerges of tardy pre-tunnelling analysis.


India's urban future is at a crossroads 
Each city faces unique challenges, requiring localized governance, better planning, and 
city-specific strategies 
s summer intensifies, Indian cities are struggling with water shortages and rising electricity 
demand and temperatures. Reports from Bengaluru and Hyderabad show a spike in water 
tanker bookings while power cuts loom due to increased air-conditioner usage. These 
annual struggles raise a pressing question - are our cities, where more than 30% of 
Indians live, prepared for climate extremes and rapid urbanisation? Urbanisation, while 
bringing about growth and opportunities, also paves the way for increased pollution, congestion, and 
environmental impacts, which often hit the underprivileged the hardest. Sustainable Futures Collective, in 
their report, 'Is India Ready for a Warming World?' (2025), find that there is much more to be done 
regarding long-term planning for climate change in cities. Concerns about how our cities are handling the 
urban heat island effect have also been raised often in Parliament. Such stark ground realities 
underscore the pressing challenges our cities face in pursuing Sustainable Development Goal-11 (SDG-
11): to create inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable urban environments by 2030. 
While global SDG-11 indicators exist, India lacks city-level tools for effective tracking. NITI Aayog's SDG 
Urban Index ranks 56 cities on 77 indicators, but its SDG-11 component is limited to four: Swachh 
Survekshan, road deaths, PMAY-U housing, and waste treatment. The Ease of Living Index covers 111 
cities but lacks a comprehensive SDG-11 assessment. International indices such as Mercer's and the 
Economist's Resilient Cities Index offer insights but miss Indian ground realities. The absence of a 
focused SDG-11 index hinders policymakers from identifying genuinely safe, sustainable, and inclusive 
cities, creating a policy-research gap. To bridge this gap and supplement the indices used by NITI Aayog 
with a more comprehensive set of indices, our latest research constructs four distinct indices - one for 
each pillar of SDG-11 wherein we ranked 10 major cities (Hyderabad, Delhi, Bengaluru, Chennai, 
Mumbai, Pune, Kolkata, Jaipur, Ahmedabad, and Surat) based on performance across select indicators 
for each index. Nine indicators were used for safety, 19 for inclusivity, and 15 for resilience and 
sustainability indexes. The parameters used for defining the indicators were borrowed from the United 
Nations' definitions of the same in the urban context. Data was sourced from a wide range of datasets 
such as Census 2011, Road Transport Yearbook, Indian Forest Survey, National Crime Research 
Bureau, Periodic Labour Force Survey, National Family Health Survey-5, Reserve Bank of India, India 
Meteorological Department's Climatological Tables, and Ola Mobility Institute's Ease of Moving Index 
2022. We employed a novel method known as the Shannon Entropy Weighting technique (borrowed 
A 

            from Multi-Criteria Decision-Making modelling) to generate weights for the indices as it provides a more 
objective approach to weighting.  
The results provide key insights into SDG-11 implementation across cities. Among the 10 major cities 
analysed, Ahmedabad ranked first in inclusivity, while Jaipur ranked the lowest. Bengaluru appeared to 
be the safest city, whereas Kolkata ranked lowest in safety. Surat led in sustainability, while Kolkata 
lagged behind. In terms of climate resilience, Chennai ranked first, while Jaipur was the least resilient. A 
comparison with NITI Aayog's SDG-11 rankings showed that cities tagged as front-runners and 
performers fared poorly in our indices. Variations in the inclusivity index reflect disparities in social and 
economic participation, emphasising the need for equitable access to opportunities in urban planning 
and broadening the idea of inclusivity.