Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 84

Maximum Mumbai: On the city, its transportation needs 
The city needs long term solutions to its transportation needs 
The railways have proposed automatic sliding doors with ventilation louvres in all Mumbai 
suburban trains by next year in response to the Mumbra train tragedy on Monday (June 9, 
2025) - four people died and nearly a dozen others were injured. Sliding doors could 
potentially force people inside and prevent footboard travel, a factor in the accident. They 
could ensure that passengers do not get down at unscheduled stops and put themselves in 
danger of being mowed down by passing trains. The proposed vestibules connecting the coaches may 
also help to evenly distribute the crowds. As in Japan, each station may then need a few enforcers who 
could shove the crowds in so that the doors could shut and the trains move. While footboard travel is 
indeed a dangerous safety issue, it is only an outcome of the dangerous overcrowding in Mumbai trains. 
For vast numbers of people, the trains offer the least expensive travel option. Not too long ago, the 
dangers of overcrowding resulted in the infamous stampede at the Elphinstone Road station bridge in 
2017. Multiple deaths are common along the three arteries that are the lifelines of Mumbai - the Central, 
Harbour and Western railway lines. Many are hit by trains while crossing tracks instead of using roads or 
bridges. While rail safety is an immediate issue that needs to be addressed, it is also time city leaders 
engineer inexpensive, alternative travel options to the trains. 
Mumbai's trains have been seen as an inevitable part of the extreme urbanisation that the city represents 
and romanticized by literature. But they are simply not humane modes of transport. The suburban train 
system has undergone little change over the decades though the city has boosted its roads and enabled 
more vehicular traffic. Two-wheelers that were a rarity a few decades ago are now common. While the 
Metro promises to decongest the city to an extent, these services price out the lower classes. Bus 
services could be enhanced for routes connecting shorter distances. Along with doubling efforts to 
change the structuring of the city from a north-south network with commuter movements dictated by 
times, planners should consider expanding ferry transport - a cheaper and possibly more eco-friendly 
mode of transport to a city bound by the sea. Broadly speaking though, stampedes such as the one in 
Bengaluru, fire accidents in congested areas, and train tragedies such as the Mumbai one only highlight 
how unprepared India is to handle the consequences of urbanisation and the thrust to overturn the 
engagement of the vast majority of the people with agriculture. 
T


A good fix: On the IRCTC and ticket booking 
The measures to curb agent and bot booking on IRCTC will benefit passengers 
The e-ticketing system of the Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd. (IRCTC) is 
one of India's most widely used e-commerce platforms. Crores of Indian rail commuters and 
passengers use it to book their tickets, which makes it imperative that the system is run 
robustly. The scale of the operation is revealing - on May 22, 2025, the IRCTC processed a 
staggering 31,814 tickets in 60 seconds to set a new record. Yet, the popular e-ticketing 
system, especially the Tatkal booking part, is plagued by issues. Extremely high demand during peak 
hours, particularly during the designated Tatkal booking window period, often leads to crashes and slow 
performance. A major concern is that the system is exploited by ticketing agents who use unfair 
automated tools (or bots), leading to rapidly dwindling ticket availability for passengers. These issues are 
what prompted the IRCTC to announce two major steps. The first was a major digital overhaul of the 
ticketing infrastructure using anti-bot systems to prevent unauthorized automated bookings - a measure 
that led to the de-activation of a whopping 2.5 crore suspect user IDs. Implementation of a content 
delivery network also helped improve website performance. In addition, Aadhaar verification is necessary 
immediately after a ticket is booked. The IRCTC has also mandated Aadhaar authentication for all Tatkal 
bookings, from July 1, along with OTP-based authentication. Authorised agents have been restricted 
from booking Tatkal tickets during the first 30 minutes of the booking window period. 
The idea behind an e-ticketing platform and the provision of Tatkal booking of tickets are to provide 
equitable chances for passengers to travel. Despite more train services having been introduced over the 
years by the Indian Railways, which is a state monopoly, demand far outstrips supply, and passengers 
have to rely on advanced booking and Tatkal tickets for their travel. When agents use bots to game the 
system, it kills the purpose of equity. Therefore, the IRCTC's steps will bring relief to passengers. That 
said, the Indian Railways must focus not only on easing the process of ticketing but also on elevating the 
passenger experience in terms of increasing its train and track capacity to fulfil travel demand, ensuring 
safety and enhancing its facilities. Seen in this context, while these ticketing fixes are important, the true 
test for the Indian Railways will be its ability to move beyond just technical and administrative solutions 
and undertake a fundamental expansion of its services to serve India's large passenger clientele. In a 
way, meaningful expansion to meet the demand will also obviate the need for reworking technological 
solutions yet again in the future. 
T