Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 72

Growth pangs: On industrial activity 
India's industrial sector requires policy intervention amid global turbulence 
It 4%, India's fiscal 2025 average of Index of Industrial Production (IIP) is at its lowest in the 
past four years, marking a slowdown in industrial activity. This could be attributed to 
uncertainties in the global economic outlook leading to tepid goods exports growth, lower 
than expected consumption demand growth, and a dip in private capital expenditure. While 
the monthly barometer of the nation's industrial output, the IIP, grew in March to 3% from 
February's 2.7%, this has been mainly on account of a rise in power production, which 
cyclically peaks in summer. Power output growth almost doubled between February (3.6%) 
and March (6.3%). But the fall in the IIP, from 5.9% (2023-24) to 4% (2024-25), warrants a closer look at 
the sectors that have lagged. While mining steeply declined from 7.5% (FY24) to 2.9% (FY25), 
manufacturing followed with 5.5% (FY24) and 4% (FY25) and electricity at 7% (FY24) and 5.1% (FY25). 
What is more significant is the degrowth of -1.6% in fiscal 25 witnessed in consumer non-durables from 
4.1% in the previous year. Contrasting this with the growth almost doubling in consumer durables from 
3.6% (FY24) to 8% (FY25) likely indicates an uptick in urban private consumption, while lingering effects 
of high food inflation in the October to December quarter of the last fiscal continue to strain rural 
consumption. Sure, retail inflation was at its lowest in six years at 4.6% in FY25, aided by steep falls in 
vegetable prices in the last quarter, but this also heavily impacted farm incomes, further straining rural 
consumption. While a decrease in the RBI's bank lending rate to 6% in April from 6.5% in January has 
led to lower capex lending rates across banks, an uncertain economic and trade environment is unlikely 
to encourage the private sector to raise investment, without substantial domestic consumption impetus 
from the government. 
The flat growth in goods exports in FY25 is another area that must concern policymakers as it indicates 
considerable strain on India's sprawling small businesses, the MSME sector, that contributes about 
45.8% in exports. This sector has witnessed remarkable growth over the past five years, quadrupling in 
size from about ₹4 lakh crore in FY21 to ₹12 lakh crore in FY25. However, given strained trade relations 
with the country's largest trading partner, the United States, India must ensure that the Bilateral Trade 
Agreement that is under negotiation fortifies India's nearly 60 million MSMEs, the vast majority of which 
are classified as micro industries. Consequently, this will protect the over 250 million jobs that the sector 
provides. 
A


The ingredient to turn around nutrition outcomes 
Empowering women financially is an effective way to improve the nutritional outreach in 
India 
The analysis of India's free foodgrain programme for 800 million people underscores a grim 
reality: that hunger and malnutrition remain pressing concerns. Yet, in India's long battle 
against malnutrition, women and girls remain the most overlooked section. Despite steady 
economic progress and numerous welfare schemes, nutritional inequality continues to be 
deeply gendered. Launched in 2018 with the vision of a malnutrition-free India by 2022, the 
Prime Minister's Overarching Scheme for Holistic Nourishment (POSHAN) Abhiyaan has the aim of 
improving nutrition for pregnant women, lactating mothers, adolescent girls, and young children. 
However, stark disparities persist. The National Family Health Survey (NFHS)-5 reveals that 57% of 
women in the age group 15 to 49 years are anaemic, in comparison to 26% of men; nearly one in five 
women are underweight. In other words, women are far more likely to be malnourished than men in 
India. These figures point to structural failures in how we address nutrition. Even after merging schemes 
into 'POSHAN 2.0' and investing heavily, the needle has not moved enough for women. 
Indeed, POSHAN Abhiyaan is India's largest nutrition programme with a hefty budget. In 2022-23, the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development was allocated nearly ₹24,000 crore for Saksham Anganwadi 
and Poshan 2.0, but by December 2022, only 69% of those funds had been utilised. Despite such 
spending, the prevalence of anaemia among women actually rose from 53% to 57% between the last 
two NFHS rounds, and about 18.7% of women remain underweight. This contrast suggests that just 
pumping in resources into a women-centric nutrition scheme is not enough. In many Indian households, 
especially the poorer ones, women's nutritional needs are literally last in line. Entrenched cultural norms 
often mean that when food is scarce, women and girls eat least and last. Thus, malnutrition is not just a 
biomedical or food-supply issue; it is a social justice issue. If a woman lacks economic independence or 
decision-making power, she may have little control over her diet and health. Even government data 
underscores this link: the NFHS-5 found that 49% of women lack decision-making power over how their 
own earnings are spent. This financial dependence often translates into compromised nutrition - a 
result of gender-based deprivation. 
Studies have shown that empowering women financially is one of the most effective ways to improve 
nutrition. Nobel laureate Esther Duflo, for instance, finds that when women control extra income, they are 
more likely to spend it on nutrition and children's well-being. In a study we conducted among low-income 
communities, we observed that women with even a modest independent income or control over 
T 

            household spending were far less likely to be undernourished. The missing piece in India's nutrition 
puzzle is women's economic and social empowerment.   The state of women's employment suggests 
that female labour force participation has risen from about 23% in 2017-18 to around 33% in 2021-22 - 
a positive shift on paper. But a vast majority of working women are in insecure, low-paying jobs. 
According to the Periodic Labour Force Surveys, as of 2021-22 only 5% of working women held a 
regular salaried job, while nearly 20% were self-employed (mostly in small-scale or informal activities). 
Moreover, self-employed women earned on average 53% less than men in similar work. In effect, many 
women who do work are barely earning enough to survive, employment has not yet translated into the 
power to make decisions or invest in their own nutrition and well-being. Thus, it is not enough to get 
women into the workforce; the quality and security of their jobs matter just as much. Without skills 
training, equal pay, and access to stable employment, women remain economically vulnerable even 
when they work. As a result, even well-intentioned nutrition programmes such as POSHAN will have 
limited impact if women cannot afford or are not empowered to consume the nutritious food being 
provided.