Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 83

Tighten the process: On the Election Commission of India, election processes 
The ECI must address legitimate concerns about voter rolls and transparency 
The Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha, Rahul Gandhi, has raised troubling questions 
about the conduct of elections based on what transpired in the 2024 Assembly elections in 
Maharashtra. There are specific issues: the abnormal increase in voters listed in electoral 
rolls between the general election and Assembly elections, higher turnout numbers after 5 
p.m. on voting day, and the Centre amending the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 to restrict 
access to CCTV footage of the polling process. Mr. Gandhi has also questioned the process of 
appointing Election Commissioners, with the Union government refusing to implement a 
Supreme Court judgment in 2023 that recommended having the Chief Justice of India as a part of the 
selection panel. While political parties, including the BJP and the Congress, have raised complaints 
about Electronic Voting Machines in the past, many did not stand scrutiny considering the administrative 
and technological safeguards. The Congress has now focused on the electoral process, raising more 
fundamental issues that need to be unpacked separately. 
A preliminary analysis by The Hindu of registered voters in States where the general election and 
Assembly elections were proximate showed that there were precedents of sharp increases in the 
electorate before Assembly elections. While the number of new voters added before the Assembly 
elections was high - more than 39 lakh voters in just six months following the general election - similar 
increases were observed in 2014 as well. The increase of nearly four million voters is a large number 
and the ECI should proactively release machine-readable data on the rolls for verification. Regarding the 
allegation that turnout increases were abnormal after 5 p.m, the argument does not hold water. This is 
based on provisional turnout figures, and Election Commission of India (ECI) data show that there was 
no significant increase in voting after 5 p.m. in Maharashtra. Provisional turnout figures shared via an 
app by the ECI are not entirely accurate as these are dependent on the manual entry of numbers during 
elections and may have discrepancies when compared to the accurate machine count. As final figures 
via Form 17C data from each booth are released only after a lag, it would be incorrect to rely on 
provisional turnout figures. However, there is another contention that merits the ECI's response: 
retaining CCTV footage and providing parties and their nominees access to it to scrutinize complaints. 
The process of updating electoral rolls must be more transparent and involve political parties for 
scrutiny and verification. It is also incumbent upon parties to show alacrity during this process than cry 
foul after the results are out. Ultimately, the onus lies on the ECI to enhance transparency in the 
electoral process and, specifically, in providing electoral rolls and retaining CCTV footage for scrutiny.


Crash and burn: On the Air India Ahmedabad plane crash and Indian aviation 
India's aviation sector needs to address safety concerns 
The first hull loss of the 'Dreamliner', one of aviation's most advanced twin-aisle aircraft, is one 
that is unsettling, more so when there have been recent examples of survivability in modern 
widebody jets. The tragic end to Air India flight AI171, on June 12, 2025 - there was one 
surviving passenger - just minutes after its liftoff from Ahmedabad for London Gatwick, and it 
touched a recorded barometric altitude of 625 feet, will be under much global scrutiny. That 
the crew were faced with a sudden and sharp turn of events on the 11-plus-year-old Boeing 
787-8, a plane with ample avionics redundancy, and reliable twin engines - the GEnx-
1B67, rated at 67,000 lbs of thrust each - has led to much speculation about the cause. 
Experts have suggested reasons such as issues with load planning, ambient air temperature 
and engine performance, wing surface settings, and even a bird hit. Inducted by Air India 
during its government-owned days, as part of a 68-aircraft deal signed with Boeing in 2006, the subfleet 
of 787-8s has played a role in its medium to long-haul network expansion to Europe, the Far East and 
Australia. The plane's global safety record has been strong in general, but it has also been an aircraft 
type that has raised some concerns. These have included assembly-line quality control, 'whistle-blower' 
statements, engine icing problems that resulted in a safety directive, a lithium aerospace battery-related 
electrical system issue that led to extensive world-wide groundings, an emergency locator transmitter 
battery fire that caused heat damage, and, in 2024, an in-flight upset that was linked to a feature in the 
flight deck crew seat. 
All eyes will be on how the airline's new owner, Tata Sons (with a 25.1% shareholding by Singapore 
Airlines Limited), steers its operations and addresses safety concerns after an 'unprecedented' four-
airline merger. The group is in the middle of executing Vihaan.AI, the airline's 'transformational roadmap 
over five years', with the appointment of a 'head of group safety, security and quality' integral to this. In 
parallel, the airline has also faced scrutiny by India's civil aviation regulatory body, the Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation. With a formal investigation, that includes international participation, having 
been initiated, in keeping with aviation protocols, the complexities that a first-time 787 crash analysis 
could throw up should be ironed out. At the 81st International Air Transport Association annual general 
meeting and World Air Transport Summit in New Delhi last week, India was recognised to be one of the 
largest aviation markets. However, its rapidly expanding aviation sector needs to address the 
challenges, which include safety, on the ground and in the air.