Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 31

Elephants in the room 
Budget done, markets are now looking at monetary policy, earnings and Trump's 
tariff tantrums 
The stock market's listless response to the Union Budget's announcements on Saturday was 
a tad surprising. While the Budget did not have any grand capital expenditure or divestment 
plans, it addressed the most important thing India Inc has been harping about for quite some 
time - slowing urban consumption demand. An additional 1 lakh crore in the hands of the 
salaried (tax-free annual amount of *12.75 lakh) is expected to give consumption a fillip, even 
if just one-third of the amount is used for spending. If some of the money gets invested in 
systematic investment plans (SIPs), the stock markets, which are under pressure due to 
foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) selling in droves, are likely to get more domestic help from mutual 
funds. Since October, FPIs have sold shares of $20.2 billion (*1.72 lakh crore) while domestic 
institutional investors have pumped in 2.72 lakh crore. At the same time, the SIP book of the mutual 
fund industry has hit a new high of ₹26,000 crore in December. Further, the Budget proposal to allow 
100% foreign direct investment in insurance, if the premiums are invested in India, will bring more long-
term money into the bond and equity markets. These are all good news for stock markets in the long run. 
Many market players, however, have a different take. More than the Budget, they are more focused on 
earnings and monetary policy. On the domestic front, the earnings season has disappointed in FY25. 
With corporate profits growing in single digits in the first nine months of the financial year, the market is 
now worried about rich valuations. The Nifty's price-to-earnings (P/E) at 21.91x (trailing 12 months) is 
close to its 10-year average of 22.80x. So, unless the corporate profits shine in FY26, stock market 
investors, especially FPIs, may continue to be cautious. While inflows into mutual funds may continue, if 
returns are muted over the medium term, even they might become more circumspect. 
Hopes are high on the monetary policy front, too, specially after the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
announced a comprehensive package to infuse as much as 1.5 lakh crore after the liquidity deficit hit a 
15-year high of *3 lakh crore. While the Monetary Policy Committee is widely expected to cut rates by 25 
basis points, markets will be more interested to know the road ahead, in terms of the number of rate 
cuts in the coming months. Also, with the December consumer price index at 5.22%, lower than the 
upper end of the RBI's tolerance band, the MPC's comfort to cut rates would be higher. More money in 
the hands of people, coupled with lower interest rates, is quite a heady mix. 
But the real elephant in the room is US President Donald Trump's tariff tantrums. The latter has 
already caused jitters after Mexico and Canada slapped retaliatory tariff on the US after Trump 
announced 25% tariff on goods from Mexico and Canada (10% on energy imports) and 10% on all 
Chinese goods. All eyes are now on China. When China's economy is sluggish and domestic 
consumption is weak, such tariffs will force Chinese manufacturers to dump their output in other markets 
at low prices. India is a big market for them. This will hurt domestic industry unless India raises its 
defence measures and becomes more protectionist. For Indian 
market players, a potential global trade war could make the Budget a distant story.


Self-inflicted injury: On Trump tariffs and the U.S. economy 
Trump's tariffs will not spare the U.S. from economic damage 
conomic estimates from United States President Donald Trump's first term suggest that the 
sweeping tariffs his administration imposed on nearly $400 billion worth of goods hurt the 
American economy. They also resulted in a net loss in real (inflation-adjusted) Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP), a decline in annual household income, and job losses in the manufacturing 
sector. A 2019 discussion paper by the Federal Reserve Board, Disentangling the Effects of 
the 2018-2019 Tariffs on a Globally Connected U.S. Manufacturing Sector, found that 
industries most exposed to tariff increases saw relative reductions in employment. The negative effects 
of rising input costs and retaliatory tariffs outweighed the benefits of import protection, leading to a net 
decline in manufacturing jobs, an estimated 0.6% loss, or about 75,000 fewer jobs than would have 
existed without the tariffs. Similarly, a 2019 report from the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), 'An 
Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2019 to 2029', projected that trade barriers would reduce 
U.S. economic output. By 2020, the CBO estimated a 0.3% decline in real GDP and a $580 reduction in 
average real household income (in 2019 dollars). 
The 25% tariff on iron and steel imports by Mr. Trump, in his second term, mirrors a similar policy from 
March 2018. In his first term, Canada, Mexico and the European Union were initially exempted until 
June 2018, after which retaliatory tariffs followed until a truce was reached in May 2019 through a 
revised North American trade agreement. Economists have pointed to these tariffs, which continued to a 
large extent under the Biden administration, being one of the factors that contributed to high inflation in 
recent years. In 2023, China dominated global steel production with 1,019 million metric tons per annum 
(mmtpa), accounting for 54% of global output, followed by India (140.8 mmtpa, 7%) and the U.S. (81.4 
mmtpa, 4%). Despite its domestic production, the U.S. relies heavily on imports from Canada, Mexico, 
and Brazil. Steel is a critical material across industries, including automotive, construction, appliances, 
and oil and gas. While the American steel industry has welcomed the new tariffs, imports are unlikely to 
decrease immediately, as a global surplus, driven by China, keeps prices competitive. Even a slight 
increase in steel prices could ripple across the economy, raising costs for consumers struggling with 
affordability. If history is any indication, Mr. Trump's tariffs may be the start of another round of self-
inflicted economic damage for an already strained U.S. economy, albeit still the world's largest.