Category: Editorial
Title: Elon Musk and the trillion dollar question Part Two

Elon Musk and the trillion dollar question

Further, the political economy effect of increasing wealth concentration engenders an erosion of the polity. Musk's wealth enables him to exercise outsized influence on democratic-institutions and practices, via campaign contributions, Super PACs, lobbying, and a supine media establishment. There's already mention of Musk using his economic influence via X (earlier Twitter) to stoke racial hatred in the UK.

Democratic institutions are always affected by economic concentration and influence. Billionaires accounted for a notable share of US federal election funding in recent cycles (about 10 per cent was made by 100 billionaire families), amplifying access and potential policy bias toward capital gains, light regulation, or incumbency questions. Billionaires, if contesting, are also about 4,000 times more likely to be elected to political office than the average person, research indicates.

Their influence on political power also fuels populism, across ideological spectrums. This focus is extended to the information-ecosystem. Billionaires control about 70 per cent of the world's biggest media and press companies. The same goes for social media. The emergence of the first trillionaire should therefore be viewed as a marker of a changing economic era.

It reflects an economic system capable of producing immense technological progress and private wealth, while simultaneously raising important questions about competition, taxation, labour rights, democratic accountability, and global economic governance. The challenge for the 21st century lies in ensuring that institutions evolve alongside the scale of economic power created by modern capitalism. The question is no longer whether wealth can be created at extraordinary levels.

It is whether societies possess the institutional capacity to ensure that the concentration of wealth does not outpace democratic accountability. By Deepanshu Mohan and Ankur Singh Mohan is Dean and Professor of Economics, O P Jindal Global University. He is a Visiting Professor at LSE and a Visiting Research Fellow at the University of Oxford.

Singh is a Research Analyst with Centre for New Economics Studies (CNES) at O P Jindal Global University
