Category: Editorial
Title: Equality is not the enemy of growth Part Two

Equality is not the enemy of growth  -  oligarchy is

Behind the façade of state regulation lies the deeper power of unequal capital distribution. Inequality and state control are frequently symbiotic, not opposed. Third, equality does not logically entail bureaucratic micromanagement. Indeed, high inequality often requires more discretionary state power, not less: Subsidies to capital, regulatory forbearance for large firms, selective tax enforcement, and ad-hoc bailouts.

By contrast, egalitarian strategies rooted in universalism, universal basic services, and public provisioning of health and education can reduce administrative discretion and political capture. Universalism is often institutionally simpler and less corrupting than an anxious, privileged, preserving inequality managed through targeted patronage. India more threatened by high concentration of capital that seeks to control Finally, the charge of resentful levelling down misunderstands the direction of causality.

Egalitarian policies are not about pulling the top down, but about preventing inequality from corroding the social and economic conditions necessary for sustained prosperity. High inequality erodes social trust. India is arguably less threatened by egalitarian resentment than by a high concentration of capital that nervously seeks to control the rest of society, fearful of challenge from those who may be more capable or innovative.

If excessive regulation is partly a function of low social trust, then inequality itself is a major contributor to over-regulation. One lesson of 20th-century economic history bears repeating: Equality is not an ethic of envy, but a form of social insurance for capitalism itself. In this sense, the way income inequality is framed in public debate is a red herring.

By associating all talk of equality with resentment, we avoid asking serious questions about inequality's real effects. With few exceptions, even among those concerned about inequality, there is little resentment of the fact that some people are very wealthy. The political force of resentment against wealth is often exaggerated.

What people worry about instead are the pragmatic consequences of inequality for growth, entrepreneurship, social trust, and institutional integrity. What is rarely acknowledged is that resentment is not directed at wealth per se, but at the translation of wealth into other forms of power that undermine political dignity and agency. For a social contract to tolerate wealth inequality, it must ensure that such inequality does not hollow out democratic citizenship.

In India, the oligarchic shaping of political agendas and the distortion of public values may be at least as serious a threat as populist overreach. The precise policy responses are, of course, complex. The relationship between growth, entrepreneurship, and inequality is contingent. But it is a measure of how degraded our public discourse has become that these elementary truths, that equality need not impede growth or entrepreneurship, have to be restated at all.

There is good reason to suspect that those who seek to silence talk of inequality in the name of the poor are, in fact, seeking to protect oligarchy. By Pratap Bhanu Mehta The writer is a contributing editor at The Indian Express
