Category: Editorial
Title: Finances role in sparking innovation Part One

Finance's role in sparking innovation

India has people who can risk money in hopes of high rewards. But they are not connected to risky start-ups Economists and others have long known that innovation is one of the key drivers of economic progress. This year's Economics Nobel Prize has brought this to the forefront again. What does it imply for India now?

Up to about 25 years ago, India's focus was not on innovation. It was on investments in people, agriculture, machinery, and infrastructure as the base. Some innovation did happen, but it was not celebrated. For example, in the 1930s, a film director and a music director figured out that they could record the video and audio of film songs separately.

This innovation created playback singing, which changed Indian entertainment forever. After Independence, people began using more efficient used auto tyres instead of the wooden wheels of bullock carts. This purposeful recycling brought about faster and easier rural travel, but hardly anyone cared.. Today, India needs breakthrough innovation, which leads to new or greatly improved goods or services that have large-scale domestic impacts, and possibly new export markets.

We have had some of this, but it has not come from private firms and start-ups. Key Indian innovations The Aadhaar card was a modern breakthrough innovation. No other country had anything like Aadhaar, which was created quickly and cheaply. Its operational costs are low enough for the government to continue to give it for free.

India's UPI is another breakthrough innovation. Even today, the payment systems of other countries are not as good as UPI. Again, it was created at low cost by Indians, and continues to be free. Chandrayaan-3's landing near the moon's south pole was also a significant breakthrough. No country had sent a lander on that side of the moon.

India was only the fourth country to have a moon lander. Once again, this innovation came at a low cost. These high-tech innovations could be financed even though they were risky because their financier was the government, which, unlike private funds, was not looking at the risk and reward. This was also the case with the Jaipur Foot.

This low-cost Indianized version of an international prosthetic for amputees was created by a doctor and a craftsman, who funded it initially and gave it for free. It's a rehabilitative boon for low-income injured people in India and some other countries. Clearly, India has the talent. So, have our start-ups not produced a flurry of such innovation?

We do have some high-tech products that are Indianized versions of available international products. That's helpful, as the Indianized products are better for us, but it's not enough. We also get straight copies of foreign products/services, which is just copycat innovation. This could also be helpful, but it's not enough.

Recently, there has been much buzz about Indian products that essentially do just what the already available foreign products do. The Indian products are not cheaper, faster, or better than what people are already using. It's simply that they are Indian, not foreign products. And there is pressure on people to switch to them as a nationalistic practice.

Support Indian products  -  how long will we depend on foreign things? This is a call for protectionism, though put forward as nationalism. There are also calls for explicit protectionism. Look, China banned so many foreign services, and developed its own successful products. India should do the same.
