Category: Editorial
Title: Finance reforms From inclusion to continuity Part Two

Finance reforms: From inclusion to continuity

Predictive Outreach is the second pillar. Advanced analytics have become a common practice for banks when it comes to fraud detection, tracking cyber risks and evaluating credit quality. The same capabilities can be used to recognise unclaimed accounts. Customers who have not received a nomination for their particular needs, repetitive communication failures, many years of no contact or inaction, or no changes to the nomination of old customers or on ageing fixed deposits can result in proactive reminder messages being sent via SMS, email, telephone or face-to-face at a branch before the deposits go into dormancy.

Integrated Succession Support is the third. One of the main reasons that unclaimed deposits come about is because the legal heirs go through a great deal of hassle. In this regard, the Indian Banks' Association (IBA) has already adopted a common application form and standard operating procedure for the settlement of claims.

This should develop into a safe and technically advanced system, which makes claims easy to process, whilst maintaining privacy and legal checks. The goal isn't to undermine protections, but to eliminate needless procedural bumps. The fourth pillar is called Financial Legacy Awareness. Generally, financial literacy campaigns emphasise saving and investing among citizens.

They don't often stress the need to keep nominees up to date, tell family about financial possessions or succession planning. They should be part and parcel of financial education in an ageing society. It's important that each depositor understands that saving their money isn't the only thing they're protecting - they're also protecting access to the money by the proper beneficiaries.

There are valuable lessons to be learned from international experience. There are a number of jurisdictions that have enhanced proactive tracing, made claims procedures easier and made greater investments in public awareness prior to assets becoming dormant. The challenge faced by India is unique due to its size, diversity, and rate of demographic change, but the rule remains the same: Prevention is better than recovery.

The RBI has already repeatedly stressed the rise in unclaimed deposits, and has recommended banks to conduct 'periodic drives' to find out who the depositors, their nominees and legal heirs are. The updated operational guidelines for the DEA Fund Scheme and directions on responsible business conduct have also enhanced the regulatory framework. Such efforts are a sign that policymakers are coming to understand the importance of proactive rather than passive engagement.

This is one more reason for this issue to be more talked about. Unclaimed deposits are starting to be seen as a measure of social change. A changing way of life with longer life expectancy, greater migration, scattered families and a growing reliance on technology are transforming wealth management and wealth transfer.

Even with the advances in technology, the number of unclaimed assets will continue to grow if financial systems do not change. India's banking reforms have evolved through distinct stages. The first expanded access. The second transformed transactions. The third is improving recovery through platforms such as UDGAM.

The fourth should be related to continuity - the continuity of financial assets to the owners throughout the life cycle. How quickly a well-developed financial system restores lost savings is not a good indicator of its maturity. Failure to forget can be considered to be the extent to which it prevents the forgetfulness of savings.
