Category: Editorial
Title: Flexible inflation targeting a good balance Part One

Flexible inflation targeting, a good balance

Deriving acceptable rates of inflation that are consistent with growth prospects and macro conditions is worth undertaking The present Flexible Inflation Targeting (FIT) framework in India as a mandate for monetary policy to manage inflation at 4% (+/-) 2% is ending in March 2026 and is under review. In this regard the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has brought out a well-researched discussion paper, and has several questions for which views have been sought. Here, this article addresses three questions: headline versus core (excluding food), acceptable level of inflation, and inflation band.

Controlling inflation Before responding to these questions, it is pertinent to highlight that inflation control by itself is an important objective of monetary policy. High inflation, above a tolerable level, is a regressive consumption tax that affects poorer households more disproportionately than the rich and households whose incomes are hedged. Indeed, high and volatile inflation hurts savings and misdirects investments.

The issue of acceptable level of inflation came up first before the Chakravarty Committee which was of the opinion that "…the acceptable rise in prices is 4 per cent (reflecting changes in relative prices necessary to attract resources to growth sectors)…." The reasoning given is somewhat opaque. The RBI has been focusing on inflation management all along, and more explicitly since the dismantling of automatic monetisation in 1994 that gave functional autonomy to the RBI in conducting monetary policy. In 2016, India adopted the FIT framework that also gave, in a broad sense, institutional autonomy.

Since 2016, India's inflation is range-bound, by and large, despite facing multiple shocks. This is an achievement for a framework that is still evolving. What to target An issue that keeps recurring is the issue of what to target  -  headline or core inflation. If the overall objective of inflation control is to promote savings and investments and to protect the poor from shocks, then headline inflation should be the appropriate target.

The assumption that 'food inflation' is only the result of supply shocks is not necessarily true. As some episodes in the past have shown, 'food inflation' in an environment of expansionary monetary policy will be much higher than in an environment of contractionary monetary policy. There is also a mistaken conclusion that the behaviour of individual prices adds up to the increase in general price level (and, hence, inflation).

As Milton Friedman famously said to an Indian audience in Mumbai in 1963, "If the Government is committed to a full employment policy, it may in response thereto expand the money supply by printing more money for Government expenditures or for other purposes. In that case, it is true that the upward push in wages produced inflation, not because it was necessarily inflationary but because it happened to be the mechanism which forced an increase in the stock of money." Without an expansion in overall liquidity or money supply, the general price level cannot rise. The present debate in India between headline versus core inflation appears to miss the distinction between changes in relative prices and general price level.

When there is no change in aggregate demand, food inflation results only in changes in relative prices. The general price level is not affected. However, Indian data show second round impacts of food inflation on core inflation through upward pressure on wages and other channels. This could lead to a change in the general price level, if the aggregate demand is allowed to expand, as Friedman warned.
