Category: Editorial
Title: Flexible inflation targeting a good balance Part Two

Flexible inflation targeting, a good balance

In such a situation, the scope of monetary policy must include 'food inflation'. Acceptable level of inflation Some studies, using Phillips Curve, have argued that there is a trade-off between growth and inflation. Empirically, the Phillips Curve argument did not stand the test of time. As Friedman and others argued, there is only a short-run trade-off, at best, and in the long run, with the expectations built-in, there will be no trade-off.

However, even in the short-run, low levels of inflation may even facilitate growth. But beyond a level, high inflation does hurt growth and this is how the concept of threshold inflation emerged. This may be noted in the graph where annual data for both inflation and growth since the 1991 period (excluding the COVID-19 year) is presented.

A simple quadratic line between the two variables gives a non-linear relationship. The point of inflection is estimated at 3.98, suggesting that acceptable inflation for India could be about 4%. Ideally, as the monetary policy is largely forward looking and the present review of FIT is to suggest the framework for the next five years, up to 2030-31, deriving acceptable rates of inflation consistent with growth prospects and macro conditions is worth undertaking.

A preliminary simulation exercise in this direction does suggest inflation of below 4% as the acceptable rate. While this needs some robustness checks, especially about what the fiscal and external pressures could be in the next five years, this suggests that there is a very limited case for arguing for a higher inflation target above 4%. On inflation band The present limit of +/-2% has delivered enough flexibility for the monetary authorities to navigate.

But what is not prescribed is how long the central bank can stay closer to the upper limit. In fact, staying close to the upper limit will defeat the spirit of the framework. The graph also suggests that beyond 6% inflation, the growth rate declines sharply. It also depends on how we navigate the fiscal policy going forward.

If we look back at the history of inflation in India, a major cause of high inflation in the 1970s and 1980s is the monetisation of fiscal deficit. That is why one major element in the reform process in the early 1990s was to abolish the system of issuing ad hoc treasury bills, which had the effect of an automatic monetisation of deficit. This was followed up later by the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act.

A natural follower of this is FIT. FRBM provisions and FIT must go together. Slipping on any one of the two frameworks will have consequences on the other, thus, risking overall macroeconomic stability. C. Rangarajan is Chairman, Madras School of Economics, Chennai. N.R. Bhanumurthy is Director, Madras School of Economics, Chennai.

The views expressed are personal
