Category: Editorial
Title: Focus on fiscal stability Part Two

Focus on fiscal stability

Spending on research and development (R&D) is still confined to the public sector. Despite the planned Rs 1 crore expenditure for R&D, not much seems to have happened on the ground. Investments by industries seem to be only towards expanding existing capacities, except those in new-age industries like semiconductors and manufacturing (which the government had to encourage through huge subsidies).

Tariff protection to industries does not help them in joining global value chains. As the Economic Survey points out, upstream industries seem to be getting more protection, possibly for a different reason. The monopolistic nature of our industries, especially in steel, cement, etc., needs to be addressed so that new entrants do not face a wall.

Gross fixed capital formation in manufacturing has declined from 21% to 16%, and the aspiration of increasing the share of manufacturing in GDP to 25% remains somewhat difficult at this juncture. Revamping Skill Development Councils and the Skill Development Corporation for skilled personnel is required, as these have not delivered to their potential. Vocational training and internship also need attention, as the outlay has not been utilised proportionately.

A lot of thought has gone into having academic and vocational streams in schools. We must accelerate efforts to significantly improve the establishment of vocational streams. It will not only enable the demographic dividend to yield benefits but also reduce youth unemployment. Countries like Germany offered to help us in this regard.

The vision of revamping industrial training institutes and putting the industry in charge seems difficult to actualise, and it must be realised. The Budget is also a vehicle to indicate the government's intentions. Reforms are a part of it. Reforms in land acquisition fell prey to politics despite the best intentions, and so did agricultural reforms.

States should be incentivised purposefully to take them forward. Surveys conducted with modern equipment to clearly delineate field areas and establish their ownership will go a long way in creating certainty for economic agents. The Economic Survey has clearly indicated that even a potential growth of 7% is contingent on achieving a 7.6% growth in capital stock and a total factor productivity (TFP) growth of 1.9%.

TFP growth during 2023-24, according to the capital, labour, energy, materials, and services (KLEMS) data, was only 0.6%, with manufacturing seeing negative growth. Measures to enhance productivity such as parks, tax holidays, and corridors cover certain sectors only. A broader outlook for productivity development is desirable.

By R Gopalan & MC Singhi, the authors are former civil servants
