Category: Editorial
Title: Gauging AI impact on growth job losses Part One

Gauging AI impact on growth, job losses

While offering a starting framework, two Niti Aayog reports overlook the potential of AI as a digital public infrastructure good Ahead of the Global AI Summit, to be hosted by New Delhi in February 2026, Niti Aayog has released three detailed reports on how the frontier technology can be used to advance Viksit Bharat goals. These reports set the stage for India's positioning ahead of the flagship event. The first report, titled AI for Viksit Bharat: The Opportunity for Accelerated Economic Growth, was released in mid-September.

Drafted by McKinsey & Co, it argued how AI could potentially narrow the gap between India's current real GDP growth (5.7% as per the report) and the aspirational 8% under Viksit Bharat. By automating routine tasks, enabling smarter decision-making, and driving innovation particularly in manufacturing, financial services, pharma, and automotive, the report sees AI boosting GDP by $500-600 billion through productivity improvements (for manufacturing and banking) and another $280- 475 billion through AI-driven R&D (in pharma and auto). The other two reports were released in October.

Roadmap for Job Creation in the AI Economy, drafted by Nasscom and Boston Consulting Group, examines AI's impact on the tech sector: by 2031, India could lose 1.5-2 million jobs to AI, but create 4 million opportunities. It says 60% of formal jobs in IT and BPO are susceptible to automation. It proposes an India AI Talent Mission to embed AI in education starting from schools, become a AI talent magnet through attractive visas and research funding, build reskilling programmes, create open-source AI commons, and operationalise a national compute infrastructure.

The third report, AI for Inclusive Societal Development, drafted by Deloitte, focuses on the nearly 500 million informal workers who form 90% of the workforce but contribute nearly half of GDP. It envisions transforming informal workers and identifies five systemic challenges: financial fragility, limited market access, inadequate skilling, weak social protection, and low productivity - all rooted in four barriers: trust deficit, poor access/usability, knowledge gaps, and outdated tools. The emphasis of the reports on collaboration between policymakers, academia, and industry is timely; the framing of AI as a transformative lever for competitiveness is well put; and the scale of ambition is welcome.

The report on societal development rightly identifies the uplift of rural and underprivileged sections as the focus areas with the help of AI and other emerging technologies. However, the first report leaves several crucial questions unanswered vis-à-vis its sectoral focus, and its GDP projections may be overly optimistic, especially when it talks about only four specific sectors: manufacturing, financial services, pharma, and the automotive industry. In national income classifications, the automotive and pharma industries are both considered a part of manufacturing, which cumulatively contributed only 14% to India's gross value added (GVA) according to the last available official GDP data (April-June FY26); 26% of GVA came from financial, real estate and professional services, of which banking is a part.

The claim that integrating AI into these four sectors would boost India's economy by $1 trillion is far-fetched. Others like infra construction, textiles, hospitality, tourism, and agriculture and allied activities generate massive employment. Food processing, logistics, and storage, where perishable losses are massive and where AI could drive efficiency without threatening jobs, do not find any mention.
