Category: Editorial
Title: Global Carbon Project underlines need for

Global Carbon Project underlines need for investments in clean energy, building people's resilience

Need for investments in clean energy, building people's resilience It also has a sobering message -- the decarbonisation drive is not strong enough to mitigate the dangerous impacts of global warming Global carbon emissions are estimated to touch a record high by the end of 2025, according to a study whose release was timed to coincide with the COP 30 underway in Brazil. The US registered the greatest increase over 2024 at 1.9 per cent, followed by India at 1.4 per cent and China and the EU at 0.4 per cent. However, the report, produced by a team of 130 scientists working with the Global Carbon Project, points out that emissions from India and China increased much more slowly compared to 2024, largely because of the large-scale deployment of renewable energy.

A relatively cooler summer and an early monsoon also meant that India's electricity-sector emissions in the first half of this year declined compared to the same period in 2024. The slowdown should also be seen as a part of a longer trend of reduction in the carbon intensity of the country's economy  - the average growth of GHG emissions came down to 3.6 per cent in 2015-2024 from 6.4 per cent in 2004-2015. In contrast, the US figures indicate a reversal of a nearly two-decade-long downward trend in the country's emissions.

Beyond providing a report card of the emissions trajectory of the major economies, the Global Carbon Project has a sobering message  -  the decarbonisation drive is not strong enough to mitigate the dangerous impacts of global warming. Renewables have edged out coal as the major source of electricity. Even then, the increasing appetite for energy means there's no let-up in fossil-fuel deployment.

Global emissions might well flatten and then decline by about 2030. But that will not be enough to keep the temperature rise to the Paris Climate Pact's target of 1.5 degrees. The new report warns that at the current emission rate, the world will be perilously close to exhausting the carbon budget for the Paris Pact's threshold.

As another report  -  also released to coincide with COP 30  -  underlines, the world is on track for a 2.6-degree temperature rise. The message should not be lost on the negotiators who have assembled in Brazil. COP 30 needs to provide a roadmap for the use of clean energy. At the same time, it's also time that more investments are made in securing lives and livelihoods against floods, droughts, cyclones, the ravages of global warming.
