Category: Editorial
Title: Global size via bank consolidation Part Two

Global size via bank consolidation

Animal spirits amplify opportunities and risks. Even after mitigation of inherent risks, there is always a residue and this residual risk is embedded in the second layer. Lenders need to mitigate this risk through online and real time monitoring of business performance and effective and mandated use of funds.

Risk may be redistributed outside the banking system through securitisation and insurance products like Credit Default Swaps (CDS). These may be the building blocks for mitigation of Expected Loss provisions as mandated by latest RBI guidelines. On tap licensing It is over a decade that RBI granted licenses to new banks.

RBI may put in place a licensing system to authorise one or two new banks on an annual basis so that over a decade we have 15-20 new banks which may encourage innovation and competitiveness and also help in deepening and widening banking access. Imbalance in funding Most of the NBFCs are non-deposit taking category and they depend heavily on banks and wholesale markets for deposits. As of September 2025, the aggregate loans of NBFC stand around ₹52 lakh crore which was funded by borrowings of about ₹45 lakh crore and public deposits are a paltry ₹1.2 lakh crore.

This best illustrates vulnerability and imbalance in funding. This creates huge ALM mismatches and liquidity issues may turn to solvency issues. The collapse of three large NBFCs exposes these fault lines. Banks account for over 40 per cent of NBFC resources directly and indirectly and this close interlinkage is another source of problem.

NBFCs have huge exposure of nearly ₹13 lakh crore to the power sector, far exceeding commercial banks' exposure of about ₹6 lakh crore and this sector contributed to huge NPAs of commercial banks in the earlier decade. Between 2023-2025 September, aggregate credit of NBFCs grew much faster at 52 per cent as compared to commercial banks credit growth rate of 36 per cent and this only emphasises the need to address imbalance in funding. RBI's scale-based regulation (SBR) is a welcome measure, but it does not address the fundamental vulnerability of the business model of NBFC.

Even DFIs face this imbalance problem. Technological changes The adoption of AI, including agentic AI in banking is gaining momentum. Banks need to reskill the entire workforce at strategic, operational and tactical levels. Digital frauds however are on the increase and it is important to further step up preventive as well as curative actions and avoid erosion of public trust in digital channels.

Bank credit is a supportive condition for growth of real economy. Growth of other sectors of finance notwithstanding, banking will continue to play a dominant role. At the current growth rate, bank credit may treble in the next 10 years or even earlier. Hence it is vital that policymakers and bankers pay heed to the opportunities, issues and concerns that may confront the banking system and we have highlighted some of them.

(This is the second and concluding part of a two-part series) By C Rangarajan & B Sambamurthy Rangarajan is Former Chairman of the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister and Former Governor, RBI; Sambamurthy is Formerly Director and CEO, IDRBT and led a commercial bank
