Category: Editorial
Title: Global size via bank consolidation Part One

Global size via bank consolidation

Big banks have the advantage of scale but small banks too perform well. NBFC model's vulne rabilities need to be addressed We continue with the critical issues to be addressed by the banking system in the coming years. Besides enhancing the ability to underwrite big ticket loans, the aspiration is also to have a couple of Indian banks in the global top league table.

Consolidation does not by itself improve liability structure and solve the ALM (Asset Liability mismatch) issue, an essential precondition to take up big ticket projects. Some of the amalgamated banks have attained size comparable to SBI of few years ago. But these banks now need organisational upgrade and cannot be just an exercise in addition and subtraction of resources of amalgamated entities.

Low hanging fruits of savings in tech and other operating costs are already plucked. They need to build in fintech like features for better customer service and risk management. While not discounting the value of big banks, it may be useful to note that small banks are not inherently disadvantaged. For example, a case study by NIBM points out that a relatively small bank, like Bank of Maharashtra has scored well above almost all the big banks in terms of various financial metrics consistently over period of over four years.

This drives home that leadership and governance are as important as scale. This also underscores that banks of all sizes and focus have a role and place in contributing to the growth of real economy. RRB consolidation It is also critical to analyse if in the process of consolidation, the local character of RRBs has been lost.

For example, in Uttar Pradesh with a population of nearly 24 crore, 36 RRBs were merged into one RRB. Uttarakhand with a population of about 1.2 crore has also one RRB. The four regions in UP are not evenly developed. The credit/deposit ratio of UP at around 60 per cent trails behind national average of 80 per cent.

So is the case of Bihar which has much lower credit/deposit ratio of only 55 per cent. Some of these States need more banks and not less. It is important to review the outcome of such mergers and corrective action taken, if the original purpose with which these banks were set up has been lost sight of.

Write off of bad loans The reduction of gross NPAs was largely achieved by write off of loans. During the last five years ending 2025, the write offs were quite staggering at ₹9.2 lakh crore and only about ₹2.10 lakh crore was recovered from written off accounts. Haircuts in some of the large accounts were as high as 75-90 per cent of the claims against the borrowers.

The real test of the efficacy of the new amendments to IBC passed by legislature recently lies in faster resolution of stressed loans and lower haircuts. The test of performance of banks therefore lies in less accumulation of non-performing loans. Risk management Probability of Default (PD) and Loss Given Default (LGD) were very high in recent years and this was manifest in huge haircuts ranging from 75 per cent to over 90 per cent in resolution and recovery.

Lenders need to revisit and upgrade their risk management practices to significantly reduce credit losses. Lending particularly to business entails multi-layered risks. Inherent risk lies in the top layer and this is essentially base value of the risk. The default and delinquency risk are inherent as credit appraisal and decision is driven by projections and assumptions on various dimensions of business and the over all economy.
