Category: Editorial
Title: Holding the Court accountable amid Part Two

Holding the Court accountable amid democratic strain

Therefore, as in the cases challenging demonetisation (2016) and the abrogation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, by the time the legality of the SIR was decided, it had become a fait accompli. This is the primary failure of the Court  -  not determining the dispute when time is of the essence. Second, the way in which the Court oversaw the process was problematic.

Unlike the cases where executive action is under judicial scrutiny, in the Bihar SIR, the Court actively involved itself and facilitated the so-called revision that led to deletion of several lakhs of voters. By virtue of several interim orders and a multitude of directions, the Court effectively administered the process. One finds a clear judicial abetment to the electoral process making it a collaborative exercise  -  quite unprecedented in the country's history.

The Court's nature shifted from a forum of judicial review to an administrative body. Third, the ex-post facto endorsement. In the Bihar SIR case, it was nevertheless crucial how the Court would substantively conceptualise the dispute. This was also determinative for other State elections, particularly in Assam and West Bengal.

One could frame the narrative in either of two ways: first, as a technical question concerning the competence and powers of the ECI; and second, as a question of deprivation of rights. In formulating the questions themselves, the Court leaned towards the former rather than the latter. Barring a singular question on proportionality and legitimacy, all other issues were misidentified.

This is why there is no effective deliberation on the legality of the process, particularly with regard to its vagueness and lack of reasoning. The disproportionate administrative demand for (often impossible) paperwork, rigid time limits, and the discriminatory impact on minorities, women, and the migrant population were overlooked. In the adjudicatory exercise, there was no appreciation of the social realities of illiteracy, poverty and lack of institutional access for a substantial number of voters.

Ultimately, the Court decided in favour of the ECI on all the issues. Judicial accountability Long ago, the liberal thinker Murray Rothbard, relying on the scholar Charles Black, noted that: "the state has …. largely transformed judicial review itself from a limiting device to yet another instrument for furnishing ideological legitimacy to the government's actions." In his classic work, The Politics of the Judiciary (1977), J.A.G.

Griffith also exposes the judiciary's natural inclination towards the political branches of the state. The Indian Supreme Court is one of the most powerful institutions in the world. Many decisions of the Court seemingly involving legal questions are essentially political questions. Therefore, it is necessary for the political Opposition to evaluate and criticise the fundamental aberrations in the judicial realm.

This is part and parcel of the function of the Opposition, in today's critical times. Manufacturing endorsements to support continuing executive excesses is symptomatic of any authoritarian regime. It is important to recognise that India is evolving into a system in which institutions have lost neutrality, as acknowledged by the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha, Rahul Gandhi, in his speech at the recent INDIA bloc convention.

It is also becoming clearer that any radical change in the polity through the judicial process is unlikely. There is a recent global trend of expanding oppositional politics beyond conventional methods to people's movements. India's democracy must embrace such political praxis. Kaleeswaram Raj is a lawyer at the Supreme Court of India; Thulasi K.

Raj is a lawyer at the Supreme Court of India
