Category: Editorial
Title: Holding the Court accountable amid Part One

Holding the Court accountable amid democratic strain

The higher judiciary's handling of the Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls raises questions about judicial scrutiny and India's democratic future In late June this year, 23 Opposition parties wrote to the Chief Justice of India (CJI) Surya Kant raising concerns about the state of the electoral process in India's democracy. The letter reiterated the broad concern that the Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls is exclusionary, and that the framework is burdensome for ordinary citizens. The Opposition's letter is also a gesture of desperation and disappointment over the Supreme Court of India's refusal to interfere with the massive and continuous disenfranchisement.

The erosion of the right to vote In Why India Votes? (2014), Mukulika Banerjee narrates various encounters with poor ordinary voters. Ms. Banerjee, in the book, referring to Mekhala Krishnamurty's study, cites an incident: A woman named Rukmini Bai was unable to vote in the elections for lack of proper identification documents.

When Rukmini was asked why it was important for her to vote, she said, "My work is to sweep up all the grain that falls from the sacks and the weighing scales on the floor. At the end of the day, I sell what I have collected and I am allowed to keep half the money. That is my income. So you see, I understand the value of each grain of wheat.

On the floor they look insignificant, just one isolated grain of wheat, but each grain that is added to the heap determines what I earn. My vote is like those grains of wheat." For any citizen of a democracy, exercising the right to adult franchise is vital. But for those who have been marginalised from mainstream society, voting becomes a powerful political act.

It reaffirms the recognition that they and their votes matter, and that they count as much as those of the privileged. This is why the long queues at polling booths, without class, caste, or income disparities, turns out to be a beautiful image of a functioning democracy. What the SIR exercise initiated by the Election Commission of India (ECI) has done is to poke at the heart of this electoral enfranchisement.

The modalities in which the ECI has invoked this process are also significant. The ECI has been successful in creating an atmosphere of anxiety for citizens, in a matter closely tied to their political identity. The right to vote is a significant facet of political expression envisaged by the Constitution.

This right is now, however, submerged in an entire overarching framework consisting of documentation, inquiry into lineage, appeals and as scholar Rudraksh Lakra calls it  -  'digital structural authoritarianism'. Role of the Court When the basic structure of a democracy is directly attacked by the executive, the kind of response by the Court  -  a counter-majoritarian institution  - deserves serious study. When a politically aggressive state battles the powerless individual with the entire state machinery at its disposal, one looks at the Court, equipped with the constitutional tools to limit state power.

The Bihar SIR case was adjudicated by the Bench led by the CJI on May 27, 2026. However, this decision came long after the election was over. The Court also has a disappointing history of postponing the final decision in cases after the state action in question has been already operated or implemented.
