Category: Editorial
Title: How clean energy could save the world Part Two

How clean energy could save the world trillions

It keeps the dog in and the car charged." Wind power has also dropped in price by about 70% since 2014. And battery storage  -  vital for storing wind and solar power  -  is also fast improving, with prices declining by 85% compared to the 2010s. "When you have small modular technologies, it's much easier to reduce costs because essentially you have innovation taking place over tens of thousands or even millions of different agents," Kingsmill Bond, energy strategist at the UK-based energy thinktank Ember, told DW.

Technologies vs. commodities Compare that to the fossil fuel system, which relies on finite materials that need to be located, extracted from the ground, transported across the world, and can only be burned once. Coal, oil and gas prices fluctuate based on geopolitics, supply shocks, and market speculation, but they do not get cheaper over time.

And this price fluctuation has serious economic consequences, climate economist Wagner explained. "That's where Putin blows a fuse, invades Ukraine… and we have the summer of 2022 when electricity prices in Europe were 10 times as high as they should have been," he said. Solar and wind technology require upfront manufacturing and construction costs, but low operating costs.

Once a solar or wind farm is built, the "fuel"  - sun and wind  -  is free and immune to global market shocks. According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), in 2024, generating electricity from solar was almost half as expensive as the lowest-cost fossil alternative, and wind power was even less. As renewable capacity expands, that price difference is expected to continue growing.

Nuclear power stands out as an exception, however. Unlike solar and wind, it's not getting cheaper. A nuclear-led transition would cost around $25 trillion more by 2050 than today's energy system. Why fossil fuels cost more than they seem Sticking with fossil fuels might feel cheaper because the infrastructure is already built.

But  -  even without taking into account the enormous cost of its harmful impact on the climate  -  running this system comes with massive ongoing operating costs. The constant mining, transport, and machinery used to extract and refine the fuels are hugely expensive. Another hidden cost comes in the form of what economists call "rent"  -  the extra profit that fossil fuel-producing countries can charge for coal, oil and gas simply because they control scarce resources that are in high demand.

Saudi Arabia, for example, can extract oil for roughly $5-10 a barrel, then sell it for between $50-100. According to World Bank data, these global fossil fuel "rents" amount to as much as $2.5 trillion a year. "We're pouring thousands of billions of dollars into the pockets of the petrostates and making them very wealthy," said energy strategist Bond.

"It's that money that's up for grabs that we don't have to spend anymore." Spending differently, not more Contrary to popular belief, transitioning to clean energy sources like solar and wind does not require spending more overall, Bond explained. Most of the investment required can simply be reallocated from what would otherwise be spent on maintaining and expanding fossil fuel infrastructure. "Basically, you invest to put up the clean energy system and that will save you the money that you're currently spending on buying fossil fuels," Bond said.
