Category: Editorial
Title: Importance of sex education in academia Part Two

Importance of sex education in academia

Such an approach emphasises the need for instructors to foster a classroom environment that builds trust, rapport, and open communication among participants. Inclusive classrooms Education should harness the diversity within classrooms and transcend mere knowledge transfer and workforce training, aiming instead to cultivate critical thinking and awareness. This is particularly urgent in today's context, where anti-democratic movements seek to erase and marginalise the experiences of LGBTQ+ individuals, promoting a narrow and exclusionary view of sexuality and intimacy.

Furthermore, it is crucial to address the growing mental health concerns affecting young people, who face immense pressure from family expectations, societal demands, and the weight of multiple global crises. In 2025, the Supreme Court sought responses from the government on integrating transgender-inclusive comprehensive sexuality education into school curricula. In the same year, the Court issued pan-India guidelines to address suicide and mental health issues among students in which gender and sexual orientation figured as reasons for discrimination at higher educational institutions.

By creating diversity-aware and compassionate learning environments, students can develop the tools to navigate contemporary challenges and create a more inclusive, equitable, and just world. Fostering allyship and care communities within educational institutions should take precedence over short-term fixes such as hiring more mental health professionals or facilitating isolated events or workshops, without creating a sustained conversation or support system. Annika Strauss is Lecturer, Department of Social and Cultural Anthropology, University of Muenster, Germany.

Sudarshan R. Kotta is Assistant Professor, Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Palakkad, Kerala
