Category: Editorial
Title: In Indian higher education a crisis of two Part Two

In Indian higher education, a crisis of two kinds of autonomy

First, India has lower gross enrolment ratios compared to its international peers despite the fact that it is one of the most extensive education systems in the world. The brain drain is very real and has reached shocking proportions over the last decade, with India ranking as the highest globally in outmigration of students to study abroad, spending a total of well over $50 billion in institutions in developed countries. The ruling forces have tried to convince the present generation of students that, in centralising education, it is creating standards and maintaining them in the interest of a uniform playing field for all.

In reality, however, not only are prospects before students entering higher education sparse, but the hurdles placed in their way in even preparing for and accessing higher education appear insurmountable. Policy tempts students with certification at multiple exit points in degree programmes, in reality further reducing employment opportunities. Centralised and computer-based testing not only leaves out large sections of youth completing school without hands-on work with computers, but it allows for aptitude for research to go completely undetected under "objective type" questions.

The NEP is very keen on student turnover, and wants to create some sort of record in the number of students "completing" higher education. One way to do this is to increase enrolment. This is very clever: it both gives the government the figures of pass-outs that it wants on its own report card, but also ruins the standards of teaching and learning in the absence of funds for infrastructure and libraries.

In sum, bringing all education under one leaky umbrella  -  through testing, centralisation of regulatory bodies, and policy that cripples autonomy  - destroys the promise of potential in future generations. Written by: Parnal Chirmuley The writer is with the Center of German Studies, School of Language, Literature, and Culture Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University
