Category: Editorial
Title: In Indian higher education a crisis of two Part One

In Indian higher education, a crisis of two kinds of autonomy

Crisis of two kinds of autonomy Not fixing something that is obviously broken is fishy. Trying to fix something that is not broken means something even fishier is afoot. This holds for higher education in India Not fixing something that is obviously broken is fishy. Trying to fix something that is not broken means something even fishier is afoot.

This holds for higher education in India since 2014. The faculty recruitment scandal in JNU, the moves to do away with the university's unique deprivation points system in admissions to different programmes, and the recent anti-reservation demonstrations are part of a disturbing pattern. In India, hierarchy and diversity are two faces of the same social coin: vast cultural, linguistic, and regional diversity is bisected by hierarchies of gender, caste, and religion.

This matrix requires systems of education that address the ills of these hierarchies as they harness the advantages the colourful canvas of languages, worldviews, and socio-economic circumstances has to offer. For this reason, no one size can fit all, and so institutional autonomy has been a crucial feature of universities seeking to forge a path into a better future. However, the term "autonomy" in the context of higher education depends on who is using it.

The academic autonomy of institutions is crucial to rigorous research across disciplines because it ensures academic independence and constant and consistent standards over long periods of time, while simultaneously protecting the scope of diversity in visions of research. The academic community has been in favour of institutional autonomy in the academic sense. Different admission policies are a reflection of this approach, deprivation points in JNU being one instance.

This points system has always stood JNU in good stead, reaching deep into the pockets of regional, caste, class, and gender deprivation to bring the best and brightest to avail of solid higher education. It seems that policy, legality, and ideology are all coming together under this dispensation to root out an innovative approach to widening access to higher education. Since the 1990s, however, policymakers have used the expression to mean financial autonomy, short for the retreat of the state in its responsibility to fund education, making way for education for profit.

And yet, while pushing for such "financial autonomy", the present dispensation is placing curbs on academic independence through the imposition of civil service rules, prohibiting academics from speaking publicly on issues of political and social concern. Centralisation of examinations and appointing faculty that are ideologically favourable are another way to cut down institutional autonomy. Since 2014, funds for public education have been massively slashed, entire degree programmes have been abolished, and there are severely reduced seats in research programmes.

In 2017, the NTA was established and registered as a society, keeping its finances opaque to audits by the CAG. Mamidala Jagadesh Kumar, appointed as VC of JNU in 2016, quickly placed entrance exams to the university in the lap of the NTA in the form of MCQ-type tests even at research levels, unheard of anywhere else. To no one's surprise, not fixing the ruin in education while appearing to do so is a useful strategy.
