Category: Editorial
Title: India has a bouquet of climate finance

India has a bouquet of climate finance options

Globally, emergency liquidity instruments, insurance linked securities are popular. Regulatory frameworks require attention In India, climate related disasters are no longer episodic but a near daily reality today, with 322 days out of 365 facing extreme weather instances. Torrential rainfall bringing floods and rising heat waves are hitting industry hubs with increasing frequency, stalling production, straining infrastructure, and destroying working capital.

Such repeated shocks in the most vulnerable regions trigger distress migration, impact health services, disrupt education and exacerbate debt cycles. Addressing such unprecedented scale of disasters require immediate and innovative solutions. India is approaching this issue with gravity and urgency. India's commitment to net zero is backed by efforts and schemes across sectors, which includes regulatory pushes viz.

Carbon Credit Trading Scheme (CCTS), draft guidelines on climate finance, innovative resilience approaches such as parametric insurance and sector-specific solutions. The last includes green steel taxonomy, climate resilient agriculture and tightening standard setting through green bond directives and climate finance taxonomy. Innovative Fin Instruments Like any developing country, India is walking a tight rope between climate risk management and economic development.

While significant focus has been endowed to adaptation, resilience finance i.e. finance directed towards reducing harms of climate shocks viz. heatwaves, floods, droughts, cyclones, sea-level rise and speedy recovery is in a nascent stage. A few plausible climate resilience approaches include parametric covers for simple and fast payments to affected parties; climate resilient crop and livestock products; emergency cash rails through reliable IDs; concessional hazard-responsive credit availability for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and investments in cooling methods, effective water management to ensure that weather-related events do not result in life and livelihood threatening setbacks.

Some innovative climate resilience instruments which are being used globally include: Climate-Resilient Debt Clauses (CRDCs):Here creditors pause a country's debt repayment following a major climate disaster; commonly used across Caribbean countries which face recurring hurricanes and floods. Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Options (Cat-DDOs):These are pre-arranged credit lines disbursed immediately upon happenstance of an emergency to provide liquidity; commonly used in Latin America. Forecast-based or anticipatory financing:Here funds are released on anticipation of climate disasters based on scientific forecasts across pre-agreed thresholds; the Red Cross has been running these pilots to reduce loss and damage in vulnerable regions.

Insurance-Linked Securities (ILS):These are investments whose payoff depends on insured catastrophe losses rather than company profits or interest rates. The most common ILS are catastrophe (cat) bonds commonly used in the US, Japan and Australia. Parametric Insurance India is exploring climate-linked insurance scheme that uses parametric triggers e.g., specific rainfall, temperature, earthquake intensity, wind-speed thresholds to autopay on triggering of certain predefined thresholds.

This would not only reduce the burden on government disaster relief fund but also provide timely assistance to the impacted parties. While a successful pilot testing for parametric insurance has been undertaken in Nagaland, globally this has become a common instrument for climate impacted regions like some states in the US, the UK, the Philippines, Japan, Caribbean and Central American countries. India boasts of a robust digital architecture wherein Direct Benefit Transfers (DBT) are being successfully credited to millions of beneficiaries, making forecast-based cash support schemes operationally feasible.

In fact, India's weather-based crop insurance payouts are increasingly being remitted via DBT under Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) making a strong case for implementing parametric insurance schemes to a wider group. Interestingly, emerging parametric heat programmes  -  such as SEWA's heat-trigger cover for informal women workers for pairing automatic triggers with direct income support to beneficiaries, or India's Heat Action Plans (HAPs) guided by National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) setting out early warnings, health measures, cooling/water access, and operational steps before and during heatwaves via DBTs  -  could be signals of preparedness for effective parametric insurance scheme implementation in India. As India moves towards developing policies and frameworks for climate resilience, insurance and financial regulators may need to introduce policies in a phased manner with a focus on reducing insurance premiums, and recovery time while also reducing burden on the government's treasury.

Private capital also needs to show willingness and support to government policies, while regulators need to expedite creating detailed yet simplified frameworks. The silver lining is that India has started work on these fronts with International Financial Services Centres Authority (IFSCA) draft framework for ILS Cat bonds and parametric climate insurance being piloted across the country. By Abhinav Jindal & Shweta Rai Jindal is a Senior Faculty and Energy Economist; Rai is Vice President, Sustainability & Climate Risk at a leading Bank
