Category: Editorial
Title: India must focus on AI and its environmental Part Two

India must focus on AI and its environmental impact

The government could also focus on the establishment of measuring standards in order to assess AI's impact. It can be done by involving stakeholders such as tech companies that are developing large-scale AI algorithms, think tanks, and non-governmental organisations that are working toward reducing carbon footprints and mitigating other environment-related challenges. This will help in building consensus on terminology, standards, and consistent indicators and reporting requirements, ultimately leading to informed policy decisions.

Another essential exercise is data collection which can be done by deploying sustainability metrics such as GHG emissions, energy, water and natural resources consumption that are utilised by AI algorithms. Environmental costs beyond energy, such as the impacts on freshwater and land use, could also be evaluated. As a part of disclosure standards The government can also explore the possibility of making the environmental impact of developing and deploying AI models as part of environmental, social and governance (ESG) disclosure standards by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Security and the Securities and Exchange Board of India.

It can take inspiration from the EU, as its Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) framework requires the disclosure of emissions data from data centres and high compute activities, which includes training of LLMs. The focus should shift to including AI as a part of solutions toward global sustainability goals. There are several AI sustainable practices that can be adopted to mitigate the adverse impact of AI on the environment such as deploying pre-trained models, using renewable resources to power data centres, and reporting AI-specific estimates.

Amar Patnaik is a lawyer and founding partner of A&N Legal Solutions LLP, a former CAG bureaucrat and a former Member of Parliament in the Rajya Sabha.
