Category: Editorial
Title: Indias PPP journey and the road ahead Part Two

India's PPP journey and the road ahead

This reduced information asymmetry has enhanced the bankability of infrastructure projects. Alongside, creation of Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvITs) has expanded the capital pool. For sponsors, InvITs mitigate the financing challenge as they free up capital for future investments through sale of steady cashflow generating projects to an InvIT.

For investors, InvITs provide a structured way for generating stable, predictable returns. A recent Knight Frank study highlights that InvITs in India have generated 16.5% returns for investors and expect the total assets under management for InvITs to increase from $73 billion in 2025 to $258 billion by 2030. PM GatiShakti seeks to reduce red-tape through timely approvals, early detection of conflicts, and improved overall coordination.

For example, in the Jogighopa Multimodal Logistic Park project in Assam, this initiative brought together waterways, railways, roads, logistics, and state agencies onto a single digital planning platform, reducing frictions in project execution. However, a fair bit of ground still needs to be covered - a key area being dispute resolution. Given the long-term nature of infrastructure projects, disagreements are inevitable.

Therefore, a time-bound and effective dispute resolution mechanism becomes critical. Further, the viability of setting up specialised courts / division benches for resolving disputes related to infrastructure projects like the Technology and Construction Court in the UK can be considered. Another aspect that limits capital formation in infrastructure is regulatory uncertainty faced by investors due to the risk of ex-post invalidation of contractual terms due to an adverse or favourable shock.

A feasible solution is to borrow from finance literature to incorporate ex-ante option-like features in contracts, so that the effects of such extreme events are transparently shared among parties. Innovative use of technology such as smart pricing of infrastructure services based on real-time usage data can enhance contracting clarity. While contract design can provide some flexibility for renegotiation, maintaining contractual sanctity gives greater confidence to investors, driving greater ex-ante participation.

V Ravi Anshuman & Srijith Mohanan, Respectively, professors of finance, IIM Bangalore and Jagdish Sheth School of Management
