Category: Editorial
Title: India has demonstrated strategic autonomy Part Two

India has demonstrated strategic autonomy, but its record is not perfect

Russian leverage is therefore limited. On oil purchases, a desire to diversify supplies and to take advantage of affordable prices over external pressures accounts for India continuing to buy Russian oil. The US is the most stringent test case for Indian strategic autonomy. Over the past decade, the US has demanded that India eliminate high tariffs on US goods and strengthen intellectual property rights, stop buying Russian oil and reduce arms purchases from Russia, commit to buying US energy, technology, and agriculture products, and prevent BRICS from anti-American actions such as "de-dollarisation".

It has also asked India to curtail relations with Iran (oil purchases and cooperation, trade and investment, the development of Chabahar port and the Chabahar-Zahedan rail link). Overall, in relation to the US, India has stuck to its guns. The exceptions are BRICS and Iran policy. India has opposed BRICS abandoning the dollar  -  though it is unclear if its opposition was under US pressure or for its own reasons.

And on Iran, it has curtailed relations and, most recently, avoided condemning the US war and Israeli actions in Iran and Lebanon. In sum, India has shown a willingness to defy bigger powers, though its record is not perfect. For some critics, being stiff-necked has resulted in rigid diplomacy and no big-power friends.

Other critics maintain that while India has resisted the bigger powers, it no longer voices criticisms of them on behalf of others (as it used to do in the heyday of its internationalist diplomacy). It has thereby lost influence globally. Supporters of India's diplomacy argue that it wisely practises "multi-alignment", which means balanced relations with bigger powers and not giving offence to them except when its security and welfare are directly threatened.

As a result, India is free to focus on its internal economic development. Who is right? The answer depends on a rigorous assessment of whether India is strategically friendless and whether that matters, whether it has lost global influence and whether that matters, and whether multi-alignment plus stubborn resistance when it counts has indeed left India free to focus on the home front to the benefit of security and welfare.

Written by: Kanti Bajpai The writer is visiting professor, International Relations, Ashoka University, and emeritus professor, Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, National University of Singapore
