Category: Editorial
Title: IndoUS trade deal is not a surrender Part One

Indo-US trade deal is not a surrender

In the agricultural segment, India has avoided major concerns and opened the doors with caution and quota systems Let me state at the very outset that anyone who thinks that exports are always good, but imports are bad does not understand trade policies. There has been lot of noise in the Indian parliament over the Indo-US trade deal. The opposition feels that the deal is a total surrender.

But the government benches projected it as the best deal under the given circumstances. The truth may be somewhere in between. There is always a give and take in any trade deal. This one is no different. India had to give in to the US's demand for buying more energy, aircraft, and high-tech equipment.

Also, we had to agree to show our "intent" or "commitment" to buy $500 billion worth of goods from US over the next five years. That looks huge as our current imports of goods from the US are well under $50 billion a year. But in return, India got the US to slash its import tariffs on Indian goods from 50% to 18%, which is very much in line with our competitors in South and Southeast Asian countries, and almost half of what is being imposed on China.

This, the government says, is the biggest victory and opens doors for significantly higher exports from India to the largest economy in the world. Opposition parties as well as some farmer groups have also expressed strong apprehensions about the agricultural segment of the trade deal. Let me dwell on it and try to clear some misgivings.

What are the fears on agri-trade front? First, the US will flood the Indian market with their agri-produce and our farmers will be severely hurt. Second, they will throw their genetically modified (GM) crops or their derivates like soya oil and dried distillers' grains (DDGs) in our food system that will risk the health of millions of our citizens.

Third, US farmers are very large in size, mechanised, and receive large subsidies, and our small farmers cannot compete with them. Let me discuss each of these. In 2024, India exported total goods worth roughly $81 billion to the US and imported goods worth $43 billion, giving India a trade surplus of about $38 billion.

Out of this, India's agri-exports were about $5.7 billion and imports roughly $2.1 billion, giving India an agri-trade surplus of $3.6 billion. In the trade deal, India has opened largely those crops which are either not grown in the country or grown on a very small area - like tree nuts and berries. Almonds have already been coming to India at a low duty of about 10% in ad-valorem terms (`42/kg).

Walnuts, pistachios, pecans, cranberries, and blueberries are likely to attract similar duty (10-15%) and there would be some imports of those. But they are not going to impact our farmers much. Concerns are raised about apples, and their duties are likely to come down from 50% to 25% or so, although more would be known only when the fine print is out.

My information is that lowered duties will be accompanied by import quotas, safeguarding our farmers adequately. The other concern on agri-imports is that of GM crops or their derivatives like soya oil and DDGs. It may be noted that India has not allowed direct import of GM corn or GM soya, which have living modified organisms and can be seeded to grow GM crops in India.
