Category: Editorial
Title: Iran wars impact on Indias farm output and Part Two

Iran war's impact on India's farm output and food inflation

Organic push Under such a scenario, while significant government efforts are underway to diversify import of chemical fertilizers and fuels from alternate sources, it is equally imperative to promote diversification towards indigenous non-chemical fertilizers like organic and bio fertilisers. The current shortage of chemical fertilizers provides a rare opportunity to promote alternate fertilizers by scaling up their domestic production and creating awareness among farmers for their successful adoption. This will not only reduce import dependency for fertilizers but also help in shifting to sustainable agricultural production thereby minimising the harmful impacts resulting from indiscriminate use of chemical fertilisers over the few past few decades or so.

Indirect implications Globally, benchmark crude oil prices rose by around 45 per cent and that of natural gas prices rose by about 60 per cent from February to March 2026, according to the World Bank commodity prices. The crude and gas prices are expected to remain high for long time even if the war ends soon. As a result, the pass-through of high fuel prices can have significant indirect impact on food inflation by raising the costs of energy and transportation of farm inputs and outputs.

In addition to the conflict, the report of World Meteorological Organization (WMO) indicates a high probability of developing El Niño conditions in the second half of 2026 that may result in less than normal rainfall in the coming monsoons. With nearly half of agricultural production in the country under rainfed conditions, deficit rainfall may significantly affect agricultural output in the coming seasons adding to the rise in food inflation. Thus, there is an urgent need to devise requisite policy strategies to scale-up domestic production and use of alternative fertilizers such as organic and bio fertilizers to reduce import dependency for fertilizers.

With robust rabi output, there may be enough time for devising requisite measures to tackle any shortages in food production in the coming seasons as well as to reduce the pass-through impact of rising fuel prices. By A Amarender Reddy & Tulsi Lingareddy Amarender Reddy is Joint Director, Policy Support Research, ICAR-National Institute of Biotic Stress Management (ICAR-NIBSM), Raipur; Tulsi Lingareddy is Senior Economist, Sustainable Finance and Agriculture, Mumbai. Views expressed are personal
