Category: Editorial
Title: Iran wars impact on Indias farm output and Part One

Iran war's impact on India's farm output and food inflation

A's farm output and food inflation There is an urgent need to ramp up domestic fertilizer production and nudge the use of organic and bio-fertilizers India's food inflation, after remaining outside the comfort zone for nearly 20 months, has provided much needed relief to consumers as well as to policy makers in 2025. In fact, the Consumer Food Price Index (CFPI) witnessed a deflationary trend in most of the months in 2025. But, with the disappearing high base effect, food inflation has already started rising in 2026 and stood at 3.47 per cent in February compared to 2.13 per cent in January, per the new Consumer Price Index (CPI) series with revised base year 2024.

Under such a situation, the ongoing conflict in West Asia may have potential adverse impacts on agricultural production and food inflation in the coming seasons with significant disruptions to supply chains especially of fuel and fertilizers. While the two-week ceasefire may provide some relief, the uncertainty of resolving conflicts still persists. Supply chain disruptions Further, even if the conflict is resolved immediately, it may take long time to fully restore supply chains to their capacity due to the substantial damages already caused.

In this context, while the precise impacts of disruptions are yet to be discerned, it is imperative to understand their potential impact on domestic agricultural production for devising requisite measures to effectively tackle food inflation. Globally, about 13 per cent of nitrogenous and 9 per cent of phosphate fertilizers are exported from the West Asia region through Strait of Hormuz, apart from about 25 per cent of seaborne crude oil prior to February 28, 2026 according UN Trade Development (UNCTAD). As a result, the disruptions in fertilizers and fuel supply chains due to the conflict can significantly impact agricultural food production globally.

Hunger threat In this regard, the UN World Food Programme (WFP) estimated that about 45 million more people could be pushed into acute hunger if conflict extends beyond mid-2026. India's dependence on the Gulf region for its nitrogen fertilizer is around 30-40 per cent. In addition, nearly 60 per cent of natural gas imports, feedstock for fertilizer production, are also from this region.

As a result, the conflict can significantly impact domestic agriculture production directly through fertilizers and indirectly through fuel supply disruptions and the resultant rising costs. Direct implications With heavy dependence on imports for raw materials and feedstock for production, domestic chemical fertilizers industry is frequently exposed to changes in international trade policies, price volatilities, geopolitical tensions, etc. More recently in 2025, due to the change in trade policies and restrictions by major countries, global fertilizer supplies came under pressure and their prices rose by about 14 per cent, according to the Commodity Market Outlook October 2025 report by the World Bank.

Post the conflict, the fertilizer prices increased by about 26 per cent in March compared to that in February as per the World Bank Commodities Price Data (The Pink Sheet) published on April 2. India's fertilizer subsidies have already risen sharply since 2019-20 onwards from about ₹0.8 lakh crore to ₹1.86 lakh crore in 2025-26 as per the Revised Estimate. With rising global fertilizer prices and increasing costs of feedstock, the fiscal burden of fertilizer subsidy is expected mount further high.
