Category: Editorial
Title: Is Indias growth rate sustainable Part One

Is India's 8.2% growth rate sustainable?

India's GDP surged 8.2% to ₹48.63 lakh crore, indicating strong economic momentum. However, the IMF's 'Grade C' rating warns of structural weaknesses that could threaten long-term growth amidst global volatility and internal challenges India's latest GDP figures position the Indian economy to be producing at a significantly higher level than last year, emphasised by the ₹48.63 lakh crore output projected to be realised in a single quarter.

The general state of the economy An 8.2% increase of GDP indicates that this rise is part of a genuine momentum rather than just being a post-pandemic bounce. The 9.1% growth in manufacturing indicates that industrial demand has increased and factories are operating closer to capacity. Services, now 60% of India's GDP, is growing at 9.2%, with financial services at 10.2%, which reflects strong credit activity, higher transactions, and sustained urban demand.

The increase in real Gross Value Added (GVA) numbers from ₹82.88 lakh crore to ₹89.41 lakh crore further indicates that agriculture, industry and services are experiencing genuine rise in added value and not just rise in prices. The real numbers held up because the nominal GDP increased by 8.8%, demonstrating that inflation remained under check. Moreover, Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) rising by 7.9% show that households are spending more.

Further, the growth of agriculture by 3.5%, supported by fuller reservoirs and better horticulture output, points to a small but real improvement in rural incomes. Inflation, which had been high for much of the previous years, finally eased and even slipped below target toward the end of 2024-25. Banks experienced significant credit growth and were in a position to lend with a clean balance sheet, maintaining capital buffers which are far in excess of regulatory requirements.

On the budget front, the Centre stuck to the path of consolidation with the help of strong GST and direct tax collections and successfully managed to keep the spending mix relatively high-quality. The external sector remained stable with a small current account deficit, healthy services exports and diversified foreign exchange reserves to weather global volatility. And so, if one were to just look at these figures, it would appear that the Indian economy is moving forward even as much of the world slows down and is eclipsed in greater economic uncertainty.

The IMF's rating Notwithstanding this, every headline has its shadow. Here, the shadow arrived in the form of a shocker when the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced that India had been assigned 'Grade C' in its recent assessment on its national income accounting. There are four grades in total: A, B, C, and D.

Some of the multiple shortcomings highlighted by the IMF team which require careful consideration and review include  -  a) the use of an outdated base year (2011/12); b) the use of wholesale price indices as data sources for deflators due to the lack of producer price indices; c) the excessive use of single deflation, which may introduce cyclical biases; d) sizeable discrepancies between production and expenditure approaches that may indicate the need to enhance the coverage of the expenditure approach data and the informal sector; e) lack of seasonally adjusted data and room for improvement in other statistical techniques used in the quarterly national accounts compilation; and f) a lack of consolidated data on States and local bodies after 2019. This raises a critical question: how can a nation possibly be underrated when it's racing at 8% while the world limps at 3%? But the truth lives in the footnotes of our own documents.
