Category: Editorial
Title: Judicial drift in the Special Intensive Part Two

Judicial drift in the Special Intensive Revision hearings

By contrast, the present SIRs are dragnet, large-scale revisions of the rolls that, in effect, turn them into citizenship determining exercises. Added to this is the fact that electoral rolls already exist. Thus the ongoing SIRs amount to an exercise where the entire populations of States are called upon to freshly establish their citizenship and their right to vote, without any pre-existing cause for suspicion.

The constitutional question then turns upon whether the ECI can simply operate on this mass presumption of non-citizenship, and force people to prove their rights from scratch. In 1995, in Lal Babu Hussein and Others vs Electoral Registration Officer and Others, the Court had held that it could not. There again, the ECI had sought to effect large-scale removal of names from the voter rolls, acting on the suspicion that in certain constituencies there were many non-voters on the rolls.

The Court struck down this exercise, and in the directions that it passed, made it clear that notices for removal from the rolls would have to be directed at specific individuals, and also a disclosure of the reason for suspicion that the individual in question was not a citizen of India. As noted above, the present SIRs completely invert that basic process. Instead of issuing notices to specific people that it reasonably suspects are non-voters, the ECI now requires everyone to come and prove that they are voters.

It is crucial to note that multiple reports have come in from various States about arbitrary deletions and of individuals having to run from pillar to post to prove that their citizenship does not exist in a vacuum. They are the product of this fundamental inversion of the state-citizen relationship. The other troubling impact of the SIR exercise is that the wholesale revision of voter rolls has brought into play the notorious Form 7, which allows any person to "object" to the inclusion of any other person in the electoral roll.

There have already been widespread reports about the misuse of Form 7 to have people struck off the rolls, en masse, from multiple States. An accentuation of disparities Finally  -  and this was something highlighted by the West Bengal Chief Minister as well  -  in a country with vast material inequalities, and disparities in access to the State, documentation requirements operate asymmetrically, and, in particular, impact the vulnerable and the marginalised (people at the intersection of the axes of caste, poverty and gender). Indian Courts have long articulated an equality jurisprudence that is cognisant of material and socio-political discrimination: a process that accentuates, rather than mitigates, these disparities, violates basic constitutional principles.

It should be obvious that these are not mere "administrative" glitches that can be corrected by administrative tweaks, in the manner in which the Court has been doing for the past eight months. Rather, the specific problems of voter deletions and disenfranchisement that are being brought to the Court on a regular basis are symptoms. They are downstream from the actual issue, which is the manner in which the ongoing SIRs invert the relationship between the state and the individual, and leave the latter effectively at the mercy of the former.

This is a question that goes to the heart of the constitutional order. It cannot be remedied through a mere administrative fix. Rather, it must be addressed from the perspective of a constitutional framework that genuinely affirms the dignity and participatory rights of every individual, refusing to reduce persons to mere cogs in the machine of state and administrative efficiency.

Gautam Bhatia is a Delhi-based lawyer
