Category: Editorial
Title: Judicial drift in the Special Intensive Part One

Judicial drift in the Special Intensive Revision hearings

The top court's conduct in the SIR case sees it moving away from its role as a constitutional court and adopting the role of administrator In the first week of February 2026, in an unprecedented event, the Chief Minister of West Bengal, Mamata Banerjee, appeared before the Supreme Court of India in the ongoing hearings around the conduct of the Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of the electoral rolls, which has been taking place in multiple States across India. The Chief Minister's arguments were focused on certain procedural infirmities that were causing hardship to the residents of her State. Her intervention led to the Court passing a slew of directions on February 9, 2026, ostensibly seeking to mitigate some of these hardships.

However, in the course of the hearing, the Court also made a statement: that no impediment to the SIR would be allowed across any of the States. Core constitutional challenge not decided This statement is baffling, because in making it, the Court appears to have pre-judged the most fundamental issue before it  -  an issue that goes to the heart of the Court's own role as the primary organ of constitutional adjudication. Challenges to the SIR were first filed before the Court in July, when it was announced for the State of Bihar.

Among other things, these petitions questioned the constitutionality of the SIR itself. Months have passed, with SIRs announced in multiple States, and the challenges have multiplied. The Bihar election has come and gone (November 2025), with the Bihar SIR effectively having become a fait accompli. The Court has held multiple hearings, where it has, in effect, played the role of an administrator, passing directions on issues such as whether or not the Aadhaar card can be used as an identification document.

However, the core constitutional challenge has not been decided, and as the Court's observations now show, the fait accompli seems to have become permanently enshrined, with any future judgment serving only to act as a retrospective validation of existing facts on the ground. It is worth remembering that in a constitutional democracy, the Court's primary role is to ensure that other state organs comply with the Constitution, and not to transform itself into an administrator. However, the Court's conduct in the SIR case is not new: while the constitutionality of the Aadhaar programme was challenged in 2012, it was only in 2018 that a final judgment was passed, by which time Aadhaar had effectively become a fait accompli, too big to be undone.

In the intervening six years, the Court had passed various orders about where and how Aadhaar could be used or demanded, but had not touched the constitutional challenge before it. The repetition of this pattern in the SIR case reveals a normalisation of the Court moving away from its role as a constitutional court, and adopting the role of the administrator. This is unfortunate.

There are significant issues Indeed, the SIR process has raised certain significant constitutional issues. Many of these issues turned upon the question of power: while the Representation of the People Act (India's umbrella election law) authorises the Election Commission of India (ECI) to conduct a special revision for "any constituency or any part of a constituency", and for reasons to be recorded, there is a fundamental question about whether this very specific power is also a carte blanche authorisation to conduct State and nation-wide SIRs. The wording of the section seems to imply that its purpose is a targeted and focused exercise meant to correct for distortions that might creep in in certain specific places.
