Category: Editorial
Title: Just war power balance and modern conflict Part Two

Just war, power balance and modern conflict

In the famous Caroline incident of 1837, where an American ship was smashed over the Niagara Falls, the British claimed self defence. America's Daniel Webster (lawyer and diplomat) contemporary warned against its unchecked disproportionate use. For Mr. Trump, no law has any meaning. America can no longer claim its role as the peacekeeper of the world.

The West Asia war But let us turn to the West Asia war. Israel's pretence of self-defence against the state of Iran is thin. Its responses in Gaza, Iran, Lebanon and Syria involve territorial aggression and are illegal and genocidal. Mr. Trump's imperialism is guided by Israel. One recalls seeing a T-shirt in Jerusalem with the legend: "Don't worry America, Israel is behind you." It is difficult to understand how survivors of the Holocaust can inflict such inhumane violence.

At the root of the conflict are three important aspects. The first, the Gulf countries have never had the military prowess to defend their oil interests, property and the excessive lifestyle of governing elites. West Asia was broken into a number of nations whose military defence came from imperial nations -  earlier from England, and now America.

In this helpless situation, they are unlikely to give up their defence arrangements with the U.S. even though its leaders or even populace do not want adverse relations with neighbouring Iran. They are cautious. Eventually, they will side with the U.S. after Iran's counterattack on their military and energy installations and on the opening of the Strait of Hormuz.

Second, the U.S. wants to control, with the Strait firmly under its control. This is the third phase objective of the "undeclared" war after the first and second phases of the war targeted military and then energy resources. Mr. Trump wants a negotiated unilateral surrender though his objectives change by the day.

If the Strait is to be wrested from Iran's control, a limited aerial and a ground attack on Kharg Island and southern Iran will alter the war irretrievably. The third question concerns who will be responsible for the reconstruction of Iran after the conflict ends, and whether reparations will be provided by the U.S., or by China and Russia, to restore the country and the balance of power. The talks in Islamabad/Pakistan were bound to fail.

The conditionalities of both parties were incompatible. The only issue that should have been discussed was the limited logistics of ceasefire. Other issues did not have a 'yes' or 'no' answer. Each issue needed to be discussed, step by step in later meetings. Nuclear energy is resolvable by oversight.

Iran was open to inspection but this was defeated in Mr. Trump's first term. Giving up missiles altogether is unreasonable for either side. Reducing America's military presence in the Gulf and West Asia will take time and require a multi-lateral meeting of the Gulf states. The answer to the Strait of Hormuz is neither Mr.

Trump's impending war, nor a negotiation between America and Iran. It requires a multilateral discussion initiated by the United Nations or a consortium of nations, including all affected countries, including China, not just Pakistan as a proxy. They have to join the peace initiative anew. Otherwise it is Munich of 1938 all over again.

Pakistan has played its part. A wider initiative is needed to look for a solution not thwarted by conditionalities, proxies, or Mr. Trump's mood and zeal for war. People and a moral voice The UN has become meaningless as a peace keeper. Perhaps Mr. Trump wants to lead a U.S.-aligned international council that includes participation from some Gulf countries.
