Category: Editorial
Title: Just war power balance and modern conflict Part One

Just war, power balance and modern conflict

Modern geopolitics challenges traditional notions of lawful and just wars Alexander Pope's famous line, "Now Europe balanc'd, neither side prevails: For nothing's left in either of the scales", reminds us that peace without war is perhaps best achieved when there is a balance of power. Hugo Grotius' concept of a just war was swallowed by the ambiguities of international law and the realpolitik of national self-interest. Special treaties of 1815 and 1839 guaranteed Switzerland and Belgium protection from attack but provided less protection for the latter.

The Hague Convention III of 1907 established procedures requiring a formal declaration of war or an ultimatum before hostilities could begin. The Covenant of the League of Nations (Article 12(1)) believed that antecedent arbitration or judicial settlement and a three month cooling period would obviate war. The Kellogg-Briand Pact (1928) condemned recourse to war and to settle controversies which were prescripted to be achieved by pacific means.

The issue of 'self defence' There are ambiguities in Article 2(4) of the United Nations Charter which, in one interpretation, invalidate the "threat or use of force (not war)" against the territorial integrity or political independence of a state. Was this too limited? Certainly, 'self defence' finds a prominent place in Article 51 of the UN Charter to recognise an "inherent right of individual or collective self defence .....

(against armed attack". There are textual differences on anticipatory self defence against any imminent danger of attack. The words of the French text invokes this using the word dans le cas où un Membre est l'objet d'une agression armée to support the right to self defence before the attack, unlike the Spanish: 'en caso de ataque armada', suggesting, as in the English, self defence if the armed attack occurs.

This has direct relevance to the U.S. aggression against Iran and Tehran's right of self defence. Article 51 should not be seen as an exception to Article 2(4) seeking to abolish war. No doubt, collective defence treaties such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) are permitted under Article 53, which, in turn, allows NATO to trigger collective self-defence under Article 5 if a member is attacked.

This fully explains the remonstrance of NATO countries not to join U.S. President Donald Trump: "This is not our war". However, the United Kingdom provided support to America through the use of its bases, while Spain denied the U.S. the use of its airspace. This bilateral attack by the U.S. and Israel on Iran was justified by claims that Iran was developing nuclear bomb, even though its nuclear facilities had been open to international inspection.

But the U.S. and Israel want Iran to become defenceless and surrender all its missiles and weaponry as well. If any country should do this, it should be Israel. The realities of just wars have been diluted out of any respectable meaning with the fall of the Soviet Union. The balance-of-power protections outlined in Pope's poem have disappeared.

The nub of all this is the concept of anticipatory self defence which the U.S. unsurprisingly has used in its attack on Vietnam, Libya, Afghanistan, Iraq, Venezuela, and now Iran. Under the doctrine of state responsibility, the U.S. used any excuse to retaliate against the Latin American states in the 19th century if its citizens were threatened claiming that international law sanctioned these because it had the "responsibility" to protect its citizens.
