Category: Editorial
Title: Lessons from SBIs presence in mutual funds Part One

Lessons from SBI's presence in mutual funds biz

SBI Mutual Fund's success shows how visionary initiatives, backed by professional management, can create enduring public FIs DN Ghosh spearheaded the creation of SBI Mutual Fund The listing of SBI Mutual Fund this week is much more than another capital market event. It offers an opportunity for policymakers to reflect on how a public sector subsidiary, built on a strategic vision nearly four decades ago, has evolved into the country's largest asset management company. Further, it underlines an important instance in institution-building in India's financial sector.

Though India's economic reforms formally began only in 1991, a few significant institutional initiatives had preceded them. Among these was the decision by State Bank of India to enter the mutual fund business in 1987, when Unit Trust of India enjoyed a virtual monopoly in the sector. Therefore even as market participants focus understandably on the entity's assets under management, profitability, valuation and future growth prospects, equally relevant are three broader lessons that emerge from this journey.

The first is the ability of a public sector institution to compete successfully in a highly competitive financial market, functioning within the constraints of public ownership. The SBI Fund steadily built scale and credibility, aided initially by partners such as Societe Generale and later Amundi of France. It has retained its leadership position despite the entry of several multinational asset managers and strong domestic competitors.

Business leaders who have headed the Fund and contributed to its growth are our usual neighbourhood people. Its rise has coincided with the remarkable expansion of India's mutual fund industry, driven by increasing financialisation of household savings, investor awareness, wide distribution networks and sustained inflows through Systematic Investment Plans. The industry today has over six crore unique investors, with participation extending well beyond metropolitan centres into Tier II and Tier III cities and even rural India.

The spread of mutual funds has become an important instrument for the democratisation of household participation in India's corporate sector. Response to market stress The second lesson is that Indian financial institutions have demonstrated their ability to respond effectively during periods of market stress. This was evident in 2020 when Franklin Templeton (US-owned) wound up six debt schemes following severe liquidity pressures.

Pursuant to directions of the Supreme Court, SBI Mutual Fund oversaw the orderly liquidation process of these schemes. The exercise ultimately enabled investors to recover more than their invested capital, reinforcing confidence in the resilience and capabilities of domestic institutions. The third, and perhaps the most enduring, lesson relates to the importance of strategic thinking in public policy.

SBI's entry into the mutual fund business was not an isolated business decision but the outcome of institutional vision. That vision came from DN Ghosh, who became SBI Chairman in 1986 after a distinguished career in government. Nearly two decades earlier, as a 40-year-old civil servant, Ghosh had been among the select officials who worked through the night to prepare the ordinance that enabled the nationalisation of 14 major banks in July 1969.

As Chairman of SBI, he would once again leave a lasting imprint by spearheading the creation of SBI Mutual Fund after first establishing SBI Capital Markets. The birth of SBI MF deserves some detailing. In his autobiography No Regrets, Ghosh recounts how he secured then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's approval for the proposal within minutes after explaining that competition to the monopoly control of UTI would deepen India's savings market and broaden investment opportunities.
