Category: Editorial
Title: Lower taxes spur buying but jobs and incomes Part One

Lower taxes spur buying, but jobs and incomes will have to grow

Jobs and incomes will have to grow The big saviour for India is its services exports, which have been recording healthy growth, even in midst of all the global turmoil. The Indian economy is going through a challenging phase. On the external front, it has been pushed into a corner with one of the highest reciprocal tariffs imposed by the US.

The government, on its part, has been trying to push up domestic demand through lower income tax and GST rates. There are other supporting factors, too, like benign inflation and a good monsoon, that are expected to keep overall domestic consumption healthy. The IMF has recently revised India's GDP growth projection for 2025-26 upwards to 6.6 per cent (the earlier projection was 6.4 per cent), even as it downgraded the growth for 2026- 27 to 6.2 per cent (earlier at 6.4 per cent).

The critical question at this point is that once the festive demand tapers, will the economy be able to maintain the growth momentum in the midst of global threats? A good monsoon and the increase in the minimum support price for rabi and kharif crops have supported rural sentiment. Indicators such as robust tractor sales, a pick-up in two-wheeler sales, a revival in government spending on agriculture and allied sectors, and a strong uptick in agricultural exports point to healthy growth in the farm sector in the second quarter of this year.

The manufacturing sector also demonstrated good performance, as reflected in improvement in indicators such as steel production, the Index of Industrial Production (IIP) for manufacturing, and non-petroleum, non-agricultural exports. The service sector's performance remains mixed. While indicators such as e-way bill generation and toll revenues improved, others such as air passenger traffic and services exports showed moderation.

India's goods exports have seen strong growth, largely due to front-loading ahead of the tariff implementation. In the first half of the year, India's non-oil goods exports grew by 7 per cent, compared to 4.6 per cent in the corresponding period of the previous year. Electronics exports that contribute around 10 per cent to India's good exports have grown by a robust 40 per cent in the period under review and that has supported the overall exports momentum.

However, in the months to come, items like gems and jewellery, textile, ready-made garments, seafood, leather and footwear will feel the adverse impact of high US tariffs. In September, as the high tariffs became effective, India's goods exports to the US fell by 12 per cent, with contraction in exports of all major items except electronics goods, which continued to record high growth. The big saviour for India is its services exports, which have been recording healthy growth, even in midst of all the global turmoil.

Services exports have grown by a CAGR of 10 per cent between FY18 and FY25, while goods exports in the same period grew by 5 per cent. In the first half of the year, exports remained healthy, growing by around 10 per cent. Even with the lingering global threats, we expect India's current account deficit to remain comfortable at around 1 per cent of GDP in FY26.

Apart from healthy services exports, the current account will be supported by remittances and benign global crude oil prices. Capital flows have been adversely impacted by persistent FII outflows from the equity market and feeble net FDI flows. Capital flows are likely to remain volatile in midst of the global uncertainties.
