Category: Editorial
Title: Lower taxes spur buying but jobs and incomes Part Two

Lower taxes spur buying, but jobs and incomes will have to grow

However, India's high forex reserve of around $690 billion remains a comforting factor. With external demand remaining vulnerable, the government's focus is on increasing domestic demand. The recent rationalisation of GST rates, reduction in income tax burden, the good monsoon, benign inflation and lower interest rates are supportive factors for domestic demand.

This is being reflected in strong festive demand this year, and hence consumer spending is likely to have recorded good growth in the first half of the year. As far as investment expenditure is concerned, the Centre's capital expenditure surged by 40 per cent during the period. While there has been a sharp jump in disbursement towards the Department of Food and Public Distribution, even after adjusting for this disbursement, the Centre's capex has risen by a healthy 29 per cent.

As per our analysis, private sector investment is also seeing a pickup led by the power, cement, construction, pharmaceuticals and logistics sectors. With the recent high frequency indicators looking good, we are projecting the economy to grow at 7.2 per cent in the second quarter, following 7.8 per cent in the first quarter. However, there is likely to be some moderation in growth in the second half of the year as India's exports feel the pinch of high US tariffs.

Moreover, central government expenditure could also slow down as it remains committed to fiscal consolidation. We expect GDP growth to moderate to around 6.3 per cent in the second half, taking the full-year growth to around 6.9 per cent. It is to be noted that some of the increase in India's real GDP growth is because of the statistical impact of the low deflator this year.

We are observing a gradual easing of inflationary pressures. Supported by strong agricultural production and recent GST rate reductions, inflation in the second half is projected to average around 2 per cent, lower than 2.2 per cent in the first half. This moderation in price pressure provides the RBI with greater flexibility to implement rate cuts should economic growth soften amid external headwinds.

The Indian economy is better placed in midst of the global turmoil. Factors like GST rate rationalisation, lower inflation and the good monsoon are supportive of domestic demand, even while the external scenario remains uncertain. As the global environment is likely to remain volatile, it will be critical to ensure that domestic demand momentum is sustained.

While impetuses like a lower tax burden will provide a boost to consumption, for longer-term growth momentum, it will be critical for household income to grow. Lower wage growth and weak hiring by the IT sector in the last couple of years is depressing household income in urban areas. The impact of reciprocal tariffs on the labour-intensive export sector will further dent household income.

Structural reforms to ensure increased private investment and job creation in the economy will help sustain healthy growth over a longer period. By Rajani Sinha The writer is chief economist, CAREEdge Ratings
