Category: Editorial
Title: Mexican challenge

Mexican challenge

India must convey displeasure on tariffs, but pursue a solution Late last week, Mexico took Asian countries by surprise, by declaring higher tariffs (between 5 per cent and 50 per cent) on non-FTA countries. This includes China, India, Indonesia, Thailand and South Korea. The move is intriguing because its economic merits are hard to fathom.

However, there is no question that India's exports of $5.7 billion to Mexico in FY25, led by auto components, textiles, electronics, chemicals and plastics stand to take a hit. India's merchandise trade with Mexico, at barely $9 billion, is insignificant for both countries, whose export levels are similar  - India's total merchandise exports is in the region of $440 billion, while Mexico's is about $600 billion. Yet, these broad figures do not convey the seriousness of Mexico's move to ramp up tariffs on 1,455 product lines.

A hit of $2 billion to India's exports seems to be the official estimate. Export of passenger vehicles, auto components and motorcycles account for $1.8 billion. In this segment, duties could rise to 35 per cent, from 20 per cent in the case of passenger vehicles and bikes, and 10-15 per cent in the case of components.

According to analysts, smartphones, whose export to Mexico is in the region of $280 million would be up against a tariff of 35 per cent, against nil at present. Aluminium exports, at nearly $400 million, too have not been spared. India has adopted a firm but conciliatory approach, suggesting that a limited preferential trade deal can be explored, besides "appropriate measures".

India's Commerce Secretary has perhaps rightly recognised that India is not Mexico's primary target. Indeed, Mexico seems to be taking aim at China, its second largest trading partner after the US, with whom it runs a trade deficit of nearly $100 billion in total goods trade of $110 billion or so. By roping in India, it seems that Mexico wants to score some brownie points with the Trump administration ahead of the review of the USMCA (United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement) next year.

Coming as it does in the midst of India's trade talks with a truculent US, the riposte seems calculated to increase pressure on India. Mexico, after the US, has chosen to violate the MFN principle of applying the same tariff for all countries for a particular product. If others follow suit, it could be a descent into chaos.

India should take up the blatant repudiation of MFN at the WTO. Mexico is trying to address the US' long-held concerns over China's products being routed through it, besides plugging individual trade deficits. However, it is worth wondering whether tariffs have worked in this case. Mexico's large trade deficit with China has persisted, despite its having imposed tariffs over the last two years.

Meanwhile, US's trade deficit with Mexico this year (till September) has climbed, compared to 2024. India must stay the course in times of global realignments and trade policy chaos.
