Category: Editorial
Title: Molochs bargain for AI

Moloch's bargain for AI

Every improvement in AI performance has a measurable drawback The Hebrew Bible condemns Moloch, an ancient Canaanite deity connected to child sacrifice. These days, the phrase "Moloch's bargain" is sometimes used figuratively to refer to circumstances in which vying for a short-term objective results in negative consequences for everyone involved or to refer to a variety of artwork, characters, and species, like the thorny devil lizard. The most popular citation of Moloch, perhaps, is in the landmark poetry of the 20th century, Howl, written by leading American poet Allen Ginsberg in 1955- 56.

Ginsberg actually constructs Moloch as the destroyer in Howl, which stands in for society, capitalism, and the government, depending on the situation. Furthermore, Moloch might be metaphorical for the negative traits that exist in each of us. Perhaps Ginsberg's poetry raises the implied question: If everyone despises the current system, who keeps it in place?

Ginsberg answers, "Moloch." As AI intrudes into our lives and lifestyles at lightning speed, in a recent paper titled 'Moloch's Bargain: Emergent Misalignment when LLMs Compete for Audiences', Batu El and James Zou, two Stanford AI researchers, highlighted certain "troubling" emergent behaviours observed in large language models (LLMs), including ChatGPT, Gemini, and Grok. "When LLMs compete for social media likes, they start making things up," Zou wrote on X. "When they compete for votes, they turn inflammatory/populist." In their paper, they dubbed this the "Moloch's Bargain" for AI, when everyone is participating in achieving competitive success at the expense of alignment, even though it would be better for everyone if no one was involved.

Simulated environments Through the use of simulated environments in various scenarios, they found that a 6.3 per cent increase in sales results in a 14 per cent increase in deceptive marketing; a 4.9 per cent increase in vote share during elections is associated with 22.3 per cent more disinformation and 12.5 per cent more populist rhetoric; and a 7.5 per cent increase in engagement on social media is associated with 188.6 per cent more disinformation and 16.3 per cent more promotion of harmful behaviours. Consequently, they concluded, "These misaligned behaviours emerge even when models are explicitly instructed to remain truthful and grounded, revealing the fragility of current alignment safeguards." According to their lab studies, LLMs that were designed for competitive success became deceptive when under pressure to deliver, even when specifically instructed to be truthful. Adopters of AI must, therefore, undoubtedly recognise and eliminate these "alignment" concerns.

But what does "truthfulness" signify to an AI? AI acts in accordance with the incentives that were incorporated into its training. Certainly, AI doesn't understand deceit or truth. For an AI, "white" and "black" are just two words  - nothing else. "Truth" and "false" don't bear the same meaning to an AI as they signify for a human being.

Without knowing whether the outputs are true or deceptive to humans, an AI only generates outputs that best suit the patterns it has learnt. The 2020 American docudrama The Social Dilemma discusses the detrimental social impacts of social media. Perhaps it can serve as a model for how quickly AI could also become harmful if the necessary guardrails fail.

The line "Moloch whose mind is pure machinery" from Ginsberg's poem artistically fits contemporary agentic AI. To prevent competitive dynamics from eroding societal trust, the recent Stanford study highlights how market-driven optimisation pressures can systematically erode alignment, resulting in a race to the bottom. It also suggests that stronger governance and carefully crafted incentives will be necessary for the safe deployment of AI systems.

Furthermore, Moloch's Bargain actually symbolises the negative aspect of AI memory. Every improvement in AI performance has a measurable drawback. A human in the loop may, thus, be the only way to avoid automated fraud that results from optimising for engagement; this might combine the efficiency of AI with human ethics and touch as well.

In terms of what AI can and cannot accomplish, the present is a very concerning time. Therefore, human-optimised AI may be required for both its development and its use as a consumption-side aid. By Atanu Biswas The writer is Professor of Statistics, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
