Category: Editorial
Title: Monsoons even more important today Part Two

Monsoons even more important today

This is an important indicator of water levels required for drinking (humans and animals) besides defining prospects for the rabi crop, which though less dependent on winter rains does use the resources from these reservoirs. This does not consider other erratic conditions such as excess monsoons which has in the past affected the horticulture output in states like Maharashtra, AP, Karnataka, and Telangana, causing spikes in inflation. Hence, monsoon progress is carefully studied and tracked for monetary policy.

Interestingly, the monsoon pattern has tended to change due to climate variations with the traditional June-September season being extended to July-October. This has been a slow process and several farmers have not yet adjusted to this transformation - thus,  the sowing pattern tends to get skewed on account of the late monsoon. It's progress is also important as crops require different levels of precipitation at different stages of flowering.

All this means is that the aggregate rainfall, though a good indicator, does not tell the entire story. The arrival is important as is the progress. Next, the spread across states is important, followed by the coverage of various crops. But excess rainfall or late withdrawal can damage crops. This position is normally known by October, where other perspective come to the fore.

The kharif crop, which is harvested from September onwards until November provides a clue on the rural income generated. While there are no official numbers on the rural economy, it is believed that roughly 50% would be coming from the farm sector. This income is important for supporting rural demand, which tends to peak in this period - the harvest cum festival season.

Rural demand has supported the FMCG and consumer goods industries in the last two years when urban demand has tended to be weak. Therefore, monsoon is critical for companies planning their output as well as investment. The war has already led to prices of oil-related products going up, in turn possibly affecting pesticide and fertiliser prices.

Here, the government can help. But when it comes to rainfall, it is beyond the purview of any authority, making the progress of monsoon even more important. Written by Madan Sabnavis Views are personal.
