Category: Editorial
Title: More heft On India and the th BRICS Summit

More heft: On India and the 18th BRICS Summit

The BRICS Summit allows India to advance its global ambitions Forging a joint statement at a major multilateral conference, in the midst of global conflicts where members are involved is never easy - for India, hosting the BRICS Summit in Delhi is the second time in recent years, since the G-20 Summit in 2023, that it has had to shoulder such a responsibility. That, however, is not the only reason India's BRICS presidency comes at a difficult time. The past few occasions India has hosted the coalition of emerging economies - in 2012, 2016 and virtually in 2021 - it was a smaller grouping of just five major powers, where managing consensus was easier.

Since the expansion in 2024  - adding Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE  -  and Indonesia's induction in 2025, BRICS' identity has evolved, but a common focus remains elusive. In addition, global conflicts involving BRICS members have grown. The war involving Iran has heightened this impact, as Iran, a victim of the U.S.-Israel strikes, as well as the UAE that was attacked by Iran in retaliation, are members that have been unwilling to agree to a common narrative on the problem.

India's position on Israel also came into conflict with other members earlier this year, as the grouping has traditionally taken a much more critical line on Israel's actions. The largest share of New Delhi's problems as host comes however from the United States, where President Donald Trump has accused it of plotting to overthrow the U.S. dollar's domination of the global economy, and has been threatening tariffs on all members for planning to increase intra-BRICS payments and trade.

As the Modi government seeks to restore ties with the Trump administration, on trade and its Indo-Pacific strategy, hosting BRICS also risks invoking America's ire, however irrational. As a result, a success in reconciling all these different strands at this time would indeed be a shot across the bow for the grouping and a big win for Indian diplomacy. Since it was first conceptualised 25 years ago, and a summit convened in 2009, the BRICS countries have risen in global stature and economic heft, benefitting intra-BRICS trade.

Today, BRICS accounts for half the world's population, two fifths of the global economy and a fourth of global trade; it also includes many of the world's top energy producers and biggest consumers. While the grouping prefers not to be called anti-western it is certainly a powerful counter to the G-7, and western-led thinking. Being part of BRICS gives India more heft in advancing its ambitions on the global high table, and its presidency has ensured it prominence on the world stage, as leaders and representatives of 11 BRICS countries including Xi Jinping, Vladimir Putin and Masoud Pezeshkian begin deliberations on Saturday at the Bharat Mandapam to discuss the future of global governance.
