Category: Editorial
Title: MSM could be a war casualty Part One

MSM could be a war casualty

Western mainstream media toes the state line during wars, social media and independent journalists challenge propaganda, filling the information gap 'Truth is the first casualty of war' is a long-held axiom, but independent and bold journalism can play a corrective role. However, that is not how it happens in real situations of war most of the time. Under coercion or persuasion, the mainstream media (MSM) becomes an amplifier of the state's war propaganda.

The manufacturing of consent becomes even fiercer. Part of this is due to the impracticality of getting accurate information regarding claims made during conflicts. Most information is generated by state actors who disseminate it selectively. Even then, proactive journalists and platforms can question official versions through logic, by obtaining information from whistleblowers within the system, and by using publicly available sources.

The MSM largely suspends that role  - and, even worse, becomes a collaborator in national security propaganda mostly. One reason MSM had its credibility eroded is that social media exposed the brazen manner in which it colludes with governments and political parties across the world. The current war of choice launched by the U.S.

and Israel against Iran is both an opportunity and a crisis for the MSM  -  it could end up as a war casualty by toeing official propaganda and becoming a carrier of misinformation, or it could try to emerge as a corrective force. At the moment, with a wider catchment of information and opinion, it is social media, independent journalists, data crunchers, and open-source intelligence trawlers that are filling the information gap deliberately created by state actors. While strategic commentators, professional editors, and reporters who toe the state line only reinforce their own echo chambers, social media is unravelling war propaganda in real time.

Western "free" media had already prepared this slant for the big war through its obfuscating coverage of the Israeli offensive on the civilian population of Gaza since October 2023, through the selection of words and headlines that cover up for Israel and blame the Palestinians. Acts of violence by the West are often reported in the passive voice, without revealing upfront who the perpetrator is. But such twisting of daily facts is peripheral to the deeper manipulation of the information environment  -  such as the complete manufacturing of the story of Iraq possessing weapons of mass destruction, which ushered in an endless war.

The Western media, which swaggers with hubris while judging journalism in the developing world, has been a sheer mouthpiece of the security establishment at every critical juncture. The high impact of social media is forcing some marginal changes in MSM behaviour in the U.S. Independent voices, from across the political spectrum  - whatever their motivations may be, ideological or material  -  have made the vertical propaganda of the American strategic establishment untenable.

Tucker Carlson alone has brought to the American public discourse points of view that the MSM had refused to carry. His interviews with Vladimir Putin in February 2024 and with Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian in July 2025  - conducted in the immediate aftermath of the first Israel-Iran war  -  made alternative perspectives available to the American public at scale. They were watched millions of times, a feat that no MSM channel or journalist in the U.S.
