Category: Editorial
Title: Navigating through a Fractured Age Part Two

Navigating through a Fractured Age

Although there are possibilities of exporting more to China - like the reverse-trade model for drugs - India's trade imbalance is massive and accounts for 35% of its global trade deficit. The dragon is also uncomfortable with Apple's shift of a part of its smartphone production to India and has filed multiple disputes at the WTO challenging India's schemes in electronics. Unfortunately, there are no easy solutions for the fraught border situation that can restore normalcy in bilateral economic relations.

Over the long haul, it can be resolved by narrowing the economic power differential between India and China. The fact remains that the dragon is five times larger than India as the second-largest economy in the world. This is reflected in relative military strength, with India in a disadvantageous position to resolve the issue through force.

India must steadily build up its economy through rapid growth to narrow this differential. By amassing troops and making border incursions at will, China only recognises India only as a weaker neighbour and not as one with whom it can persuade to join its bloc as an ally. The upshot is that the option of opportunistically aligning with either bloc does not appear feasible.

The most efficacious course of action, however, is for India to concentrate on building its strengths to remain the world's fastest-growing large economy and improving its trade prospects and investment inflows through a network of free trade agreements with important developed powers like the European Union, and the Global South and mega regional groupings like the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership. Shearing notes that India may not have the heft to challenge the US and China but its size and growth will encourage it to play a more strategically autonomous role in world affairs. The prospect then is for Washington and Beijing making efforts to court its support on key issues as India copes with a fractured age.

Written by N Chandra Mohan The writer is an economics and business commentator based in New Delhi.
