Category: Editorial
Title: New global order and economics Part One

New global order and economics

The collapse of the rules-based world order has resulted in an existential dilemma for the discipline of economics For the last nine months everyone has been asking questions about the 'new world order'. Prime Minister Mark Carney of Canada summed up the global angst last month when he told the best and the brightest of the world at Davos that the world was back to a combination of Darwinism and Louis 18th of France. Darwin had said only the fittest would survive.

Louis had said if we don't hang together we will hang separately. Carney, pulling the two together, said that the rule based world order was now gone and it would be survival of the fittest henceforth. He also said the middle powers must huddle together to ward off the big boys, you know, hang together.

Excellent. Large cosmic questions have a great advantage: they need not be answered except in large cosmic ways. This gives a lot of people a lot of grist for the mill. But an important question that no one is asking is what's going to happen to that darling of academic disciplines for 75 years, economics.

Or as Gabbar asks in Sholay, "ab tera kya hoga, Kaliye?" The question is important because the answer depends on whether you regard the foundation of world order as being economics or vice versa, that is, economics as a product of world order. It's the old chicken-egg problem. Two opposing assumptions It all depends on what assumptions are made.

One is to assume that the world order doesn't change and the other is to assume that economics doesn't change. You can take your pick depending on your politics. The first assumption is simply another way of saying that it's the dominant players that change. Britain then, America now, and who knows who else tomorrow, could even be India.

The second assumption is purely Marxian, you know, all that base and superstructure stuff which says the world order is built on economic and commercial considerations. Economists who subscribe to the first view say liberalism and democracy, accompanied by highly regulated capitalism, which regards profit as immoral, gives the best results socially. But those who subscribe to the Marxian view say economics must have a single goal: unregulated profit maximisation.

This sounds counterintuitive till you see Communist China focusing entirely on profit and capitalist Europe focusing on everything but profit. Again, you can decide which of these you prefer. In this overall context economics has to decide which master it serves: government or market. Post-1945 western economics only talked about the markets.

For Indians who studied economics in India, the disjunction between what was taught and what was experienced was stark. Western economics and Indian economics were poles apart. The whole world is now facing this divergence. The intellectual endorsement of market economics has moved to non-western economies and its counterpart in western economics has moved towards non-market economics, that is, statism.

You can see this in the published research of the last 25 years, and not just actions by governments. In other words, the West has moved to the left and the rest have moved to the right. The predictable result is that the West has lost its economic dominance and the rest have gained it. In the West it's equity that's important.
