Category: Editorial
Title: Not just national security public health too Part Two

Not just national security, public health too needs an intelligence system

It expects surveillance to be primarily based on de-identified (anonymised) individual-level patient information that emanates from health care facilities, laboratories, and other sources supported by an adequately resourced, effective administrative and technical structure. For a vision document, it is neither sufficiently visionary nor imaginative. It fails to recognise the rapid and massive changes happening globally and nationally in the way information is collected, processed and analysed.

An exclusive focus on Electronic Health Records is inappropriate. Modern disease surveillance requires a complex architecture of an adaptable system with non-linear data flow, chaotic dynamics, emergent behaviour, and multi-scalar nested systems. The next-generation surveillance system will need to include the multiple data sources listed above.

This requires data fusion, storage, data wrangling, data analysis and knowledge translation with a real-time dashboard, interactive data source, and analytic methods on a real-time basis. We need to make these inter-relational datasets amenable to collective synthesis. This can only be achieved by the use of artificial intelligence to augment traditional epidemiology in helping public health sort through large amounts of data.

Machine learning can enhance predictive modelling, improve cluster analysis and social network analysis to increase the sensitivity of surveillance systems. Natural language processing can help extract meaning from unstructured data contained in clinical notes, social media and news. The key challenge in any intelligence system will always be the "human in the loop".

While we should invest in developing AI solutions to support public health surveillance, humans cannot be replaced. Our current approach of training Epidemic Intelligence Officers, while appropriate for the traditional approach, is inadequate for the future. We need to get more technology-trained people into the system.

Given the surveillance needs, architecture, and oversight, I suggest setting up an autonomous, well-resourced national surveillance authority. Like a good security system goes beyond the police force, which neither has the time nor the capacity to handle security issues, we need to look beyond the routine health system if we want a good quality public health intelligence system. While the health system can continue to be its eyes (one among others) and hands, we can no longer afford for it to be its brain too!

By Anand Krishnan The writer is a Professor of Community Medicine at the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi. All views expressed are personal
