Category: Editorial
Title: Not West vs rest Indias challenge is how to Part Two

Not West vs rest, India's challenge is how to navigate within West itself

Third, Trump is recasting not only the internal balance of the West but the terms of its engagement with Russia and China. In pursuit of a grand bargain with Tehran, he has strained the alliance with Israel; in South Asia, he is talking up Pakistan. His fluid new approaches, with no attachment to the past, promise to transform the geopolitics of Europe, the Middle East and the Indo-Pacific.

The Mandate for Internal Transformation The task of Indian diplomacy is to manage these changes with patience and calm. The answers are only partly external; most lie at home  -  in restructuring the economy, modernising the defence industrial base, revitalising the technological ecosystem. Curiously, partnership with thcarneye West remains crucial to that effort.

That brings us back to Évian in 2003, where China's president, Hu Jintao, sat alongside Vajpayee  -  the first time Beijing was drawn into the Western outreach. China's GDP then was about $1.6 trillion, India's barely $600 billion. China has since raced to some $20 trillion in 2025; India still hovers below $4 trillion.

The speed and purpose of internal transformation is what distinguishes China from India. It is not just a question of quantity. The quality of the Chinese economy in terms of its technological advances and scientific sophistication is more than impressive. Lessons from China's Cold Realism China's leaders are no longer invited to the G7, yet they loom large over it: A central question at Évian is how to manage the global imbalances produced by China's export juggernaut.

That transformation underlines the twin dialectic China navigated with such aplomb over the last five decades: To rise through deeper ties with the West but also strengthen China's national capability. China today is at once a huge economic partner for the West and its principal strategic challenger. Where many in Delhi's foreign policy community see an irreconcilable contradiction between the pursuit of strategic autonomy and partnership with the West, China demonstrated the art of transcending it  -  and against far steeper odds.

The Korean War of 1950-53 cost hundreds of thousands of Chinese lives, yet within two decades, Mao Zedong was befriending Washington. It is that cold realism that separates China's hard-headed strategy from the perpetually prickly and anxious Indian foreign policy discourse. Written by: C. Raja Mohan The writer is a contributing editor on international affairs for The Indian Express.

He is also associated with the Motwani Jadeja Institute of American Studies, Jindal Global University and the Council on Strategic and Defence Research, Delhi
