Category: Editorial
Title: Not West vs rest Indias challenge is how to Part One

Not West vs rest, India's challenge is how to navigate within West itself

Is how to navigate within West itself Where many in Delhi's foreign policy community see an irreconcilable contradiction between the pursuit of strategic autonomy and partnership with the West, China demonstrated the art of transcending it  -  and against far steeper odds Narendra Modi's participation in the G7 summit at Évian this week marks India's 13th appearance at the forum and the Prime Minister's seventh in a row since 2019. Fittingly, India's engagement with the grouping began at Évian itself, when Atal Bihari Vajpayee was invited in 2003, and continued with Manmohan Singh between 2005 and 2009. That India is a regular invitee reflects a deepening mutual engagement, rooted in the country's economic transformation since the 1990s and its growing salience in the international system.

During the Cold War, India placed most of its economic and political eggs in the Russian basket. The Soviet collapse of 1991, coinciding with the breakdown of India's own economic model, forced a restructuring that profoundly altered Delhi's relationship with the West. Today, the G7 is the principal destination of Indian exports, absorbing nearly a third of the country's merchandise shipments.

Most of India's service exports also go to the G7. It is also the main destination for the outward flow of Indian professionals and students; a more restrictive America since Donald Trump's re-election as president has merely redirected some of those flows to Europe. Despite the rhetoric about building a new global economic order with Russia and China, India's economic diplomacy in recent years has been less about BRICS than about deepening ties with the developed West through trade liberalisation.

India's quest for diversification is now less between the West and BRICS than within the West  -  it is marked by a new determination to deepen ties with Europe, the UK and Canada in the G7. Navigating the Shifts in Western Power India's real challenge today comes from rapid and unexpected change within the West itself. Three trends stand out.

The first is the rise of American unilateralism under Trump. Trump's instinct is to pursue the narrow national interest of the US in the name of "America First". As he forces allies to fall in line on key issues, the divisions across the Atlantic have widened. Contrary to the popular notion of American decline, the US has grown stronger relative to its Western allies over three decades.

In the mid-1990s, the European economy was roughly equal in size to America's, and Japan's GDP stood at two-thirds to three-quarters of it. Today, the eurozone is little more than half of US output and Japan barely a seventh. With its GDP at around $31 trillion and still growing at 2.5 per cent, the US is set to widen its lead over allies and over China -  the one power whose relative weight has risen, though Beijing's own troubles have dimmed the prospect of overtaking America.

To be sure, Washington has ceded some ground to Beijing in select frontier areas  -  advanced manufacturing, electric vehicles, increasingly competitive open-weight AI models. Trump's industrial policy is eager to make amends. But the depth of the American innovation system and its capital markets remains without parallel.

SpaceX's listing on the Nasdaq last week, on extravagant promises of a new space economy, pushed its paper valuation to $2 trillion despite the absence of past profitability. What it really signals is a new technological revolution  -  in what China's communists call the "new quality productive forces". French President Emmanuel Macron's decision to seat the tech titans at Évian as near-equals underlines the rise of a new American tech capitalism with far-reaching consequences.
