
Title: On guard: on India and the Qdenga dengue vaccine
Category: Editorial


the CDSCO’s approval of the Qdenga dengue vaccine — the first in India’s history — follows
the vaccine’s licensing in over 40 countries and a WHO prequalification, and some of the
country’s worst dengue years vis-à-vis the disease’s burden, although that is evidence of
better surveillance as well. The Aedes mosquitoes that spread the disease are expanding
into semi-urban and rural districts, where conventional vector control is harder to sustain. The
time to develop the vaccine itself is understandable. The four antigenically distinct dengue serotypes
and the possibility of a ‘second infection’ by a different serotype producing more severe disease through
antibody-dependent enhancement mean that an effective shot has to induce strong immunity against all
four at once. This constraint nearly derailed the first licensed dengue vaccine, Dengvaxia, and the
controversy in the Philippines in 2017 prompted greater regulatory caution. The design of Qdenga, by
Japan-based Takeda, differs from that of Dengvaxia and, unlike the latter, can be administered without
screening for a prior dengue infection.
Its protection against the serotypes varies from highest against DENV-2, followed by DENV-1, while
uncertainty remains regarding protection against DENV-3 and DENV-4 in people without prior exposure
to dengue. This is concerning because while DENV-2 is more common in India, DENV-3 prevalence is
increasing. If the DENV-3 serotype dominates the 2026 monsoon season, Qdenga’s impact could be
substantially lower than anticipated, especially if many recipients are dengue-naïve. Qdenga also
requires two doses across three months apart. Clinical data suggest that the first dose protects unevenly,
with stronger evidence against DENV-1 and DENV-2 than DENV-3 and DENV-4. If a seronegative
person takes the first shot on July 1, when the monsoon begins, and encounters DENV-3 in August, the
shot may not suffice to prevent severe illness. Ensuring the highly mobile migrant workforce receives its
second dose will be significantly difficult, too; those falling through the cracks may also be exposed to
concerns raised in the TIDES trial of a ‘negative efficacy’ against hospitalisation related to DENV-3
among seronegative children. Finally, following Takeda’s tiered pricing strategy worldwide, Qdenga may
be too expensive for people living in dense urban slums with poor drainage. To ensure sufficient uptake
among the populations at greatest risk, the government must negotiate a lower price. In the end,
administering a dengue vaccine properly in a population is no less tricky than developing a vaccine
against dengue, and the Qdenga rollout should give no cause for complacency.



the 10% tariff that the United States has imposed on India and several other countries over
their imports of goods supposedly made using forced labour is merely an attempt to restore
permanent tariffs and, once again, highlight the benefits of a trade deal with the U.S. [A] The
U.S. Supreme Court’s [a]/ February 2026 decision [b]/ dealt a body blow to [c]/ the U.S.’s
attempts to [d]/ secure trade deals [e]. The main threat, of high reciprocal tariffs, had been
removed. U.S. President Donald Trump’s solution, of a temporary 10% tariff on all countries, suffered
from two weaknesses: it would expire in 150 days, and was levied on all countries equally, regardless of
whether they had a deal with the U.S. or not. Those tariffs have now expired. The Section 301 ‘forced
labour’ tariffs announced last week are more permanent, and have carved out benefits for those with
trade deals with the U.S. For example, while U.S. imports from India will face a 10% tariff over and above
the base tariff the U.S. charges everybody, the European Union and Taiwan will face a total tariff of 10%.
Similar benefits have been accorded to Japan, South Korea and Switzerland, all of which also have trade
deals with the U.S. at various stages of formalisation. If stopping forced labour was the primary focus,
tariffs would have been applied equally across all offenders, regardless of trade deal status. The tariffs
would also not have had as many product-wise exemptions and country-wise quotas as the final version
has.
There is also the question of whether the U.S. should be penalising other countries for their trade with
third parties. India has not been accused of using forced labour, yet faces tariffs because others have
been. This, soon after the U.S. government told a court that it did not want to act as the “world police”.
India has done well to reduce the proposed 12.5% tariffs to a final 10%, the same as or better than
most of its competitors. All it took was a notification banning the import of goods made using forced
labour. The action itself will be difficult to enforce, since it will require countries such as China and
Malaysia to allow Indian government officials to visit and investigate their labour conditions. But simply
issuing the notification won India a tariff reduction. However, uncertainty persists since the other Section
301 investigation, on excess capacity, is yet to play out and could result in further tariffs. [B] It is highly
unlikely that India will [P] clear a trade [Q] deal until those tariffs become [R] accept. That said, the
tariffs should not push India towards a deal. Experience has shown that the U.S. tariff landscape can
change radically even after a deal is signed.



andy Burnham, the former Mayor of Greater Manchester and the new Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom, has picked a challenging time to enter office. The revolving doors at 10
Downing Street appear to be spinning off their hinges — he will be the seventh Prime
Minister in just over a decade, and the fifth in four years. Nevertheless, he has promised a
fresh start, and an economic and social revival. To truly set himself apart from the fumbling
approach of his predecessor, Keir Starmer, he might have to spearhead a radical change in
governance, and be willing to redefine the traditional Labour Party framework to tackle the spiralling
crises of cost of living, fraying global alliances, disagreements on immigration policy and the fiscal
pressures of an ageing population. He might learn from Mr. Starmer’s missteps, who won Labour a
resounding victory in 2024 with just 34% of the popular vote. It was, however, a “loveless landslide”
according to some analysts, and had more to do with deep disenchantment with the previous
Conservative governments for losing their grip on macroeconomic policy management. Although Mr.
Starmer at the time vowed to restore “respect to politics”, a mini scandal over government officials
accepting gifts, a policy furore over botched plans to cut welfare spending, and an error of judgement in
appointing Peter Mandelson, discredited by his association with convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein,
as U.K. Ambassador to the U.S., led to Mr. Starmer’s ousting by his party.
To avoid continuing this cycle of leaders who appear to be unable to govern what appears to be an
increasingly ungovernable polity after Brexit, and a weary public that is looking for a new model of
governance to stabilise their embattled nation amidst political storms, Mr. Burnham will need to quickly
implement reforms while tamping down on infighting and factionalism within Labour. He has little room
to manoeuvre on public revenue given his party’s promise not to raise taxes; yet he will have to find
innovative ways to cut the U.K.’s welfare bill and entitlements. Similarly, he cannot abandon European
allies in their support for Ukraine against Russian depredations on its soil, yet he will have to act quickly
to mend fences with the Donald Trump administration to prevent further breakdown in the “special
relationship”. On immigration, net migration to the U.K. is said to be down compared to previous years,
yet the thirst for even tighter immigration policies in some quarters is being contested by some Labour
MPs and progressive leaders, who are seeking a compromise approach. He will have to step nimbly
across the many political minefields in tackling these challenges, yet remember that history rewards
dynamism and fresh thinking, rather than leaders stuck in survival mode.
A

