Category: Editorial
Title: On nuclear energy an Indian milestone

On nuclear energy, an Indian milestone

The news from Kalpakkam is one of several developments in the last couple of years that suggest that India is finally making serious efforts for a rapid expansion of its nuclear sector The attainment of criticality by the Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor in Kalpakkam, Tamil Nadu, is a long-awaited milestone that marks a generational shift in India's use of nuclear energy. It represents the beginning of the realisation of the vision of the founding fathers of India's atomic energy programme over seven decades ago. The fast breeder reactors are incredibly more challenging to design, build and operate, compared to the Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors that are the mainstay of India's nuclear sector.

But more than the technological accomplishment, the commencement of the second stage of India's three-stage nuclear programme signifies an important step forward in securing the country's energy independence and strategic autonomy in the coming decades. For long viewed with suspicion and considered a safety risk, nuclear energy is now seen as a critical source of clean and abundant energy, essential to satisfy the growing energy requirements in a world that is compelled to reduce, and progressively eliminate, its dependence on fossil fuels. For India, it is even more critical, because it has the potential to free up, or at least significantly reduce, dependence on energy imports that make the country vulnerable to external shocks.

India's nuclear sector is also dependent on other countries, because the main fuel, uranium, is not adequately available in the country. It is to the credit of Homi Bhabha and his generation of Indian nuclear scientists that they articulated the three-stage pathway  -  the third stage is about using thorium as the main fuel, found in abundance in India. Travelling on the three-stage pathway was never going to be easy.

The first test fast breeder reactor could only be built in the early 2000s. Several times during this journey, it appeared that India had lost focus. The attainment of criticality at Kalpakkam, hopefully, will put the transition on the fast track once again. The news from Kalpakkam suggests that India is finally making serious efforts for rapid expansion of its nuclear sector.

The setting up of a nuclear energy mission, the enactment of the SHANTI Act, the push for development of SMRs, opening up of the nuclear sector for private participation, are all vital steps in this direction.
