Category: Editorial
Title: Organic waste in India is a wasted Part One

Organic waste in India is a wasted opportunity

The real challenge is translating regulatory framework and civic ambition into actionable outcomes If India is to realise the vision of 'Viksit Bharat' by 2047, it not only has to sustain but also accelerate economic growth for at least the next two decades. Rising consumption patterns across both rural and urban India are a natural consequence of rising incomes. India continues to follow a largely linear economic path: extract or produce, manufacture, consume and dispose, without dependable systems for waste management and resource recovery.

The result is an extraordinary increase in the quantity and complexity of waste being generated. The evidence of this waste is visible across the country. Rivers, lakes, mountain slopes, including high passes, national parks, pilgrim paths, beaches, valuable urban land, vacant plots and urban or rural roadways all bear testimony to mixed waste being discarded indiscriminately.

Open burning occurs in urban and rural areas and contributes to air pollution, exposing people to harmful emissions. The waste being dumped has various components. While some waste streams can be hazardous or inert, others are recyclable; organic waste is biodegradable and deserves special attention.

It is potentially recoverable as compost, biogas, compressed biogas or biochar at the point of generation. Yet, when dumped and mixed with other waste, it not only contaminates recyclable waste but also creates odour, becomes an eyesore, attracts disease vectors and releases noxious fumes and methane, a greenhouse gas. India does not suffer from an absence of laws.

Its regulatory framework for solid waste has evolved since the first rules were notified in 2000. The Solid Waste Management Rules, 2026, have reinforced requirements for source segregation and local treatment of wet waste through composting or bio-methanation. The real challenge is translating regulatory framework and civic ambition into actionable outcomes.

Chain of custody Waste management is frequently regarded as a behavioural problem. Civic responsibility is undeniably important, but we must ask ourselves if citizens perfectly segregated their waste, would it lead to its appropriate processing and end-of-life treatment? Segregation must be followed by collection, transportation, processing and final reuse through a chain of custody.

It has to be ensured that only that waste reaches the landfill which is non-recyclable, non-energy-recoverable, non-reactive and inert, or is pre-processing rejects and residual waste that cannot be processed or reused. Organic waste lies at the intersection of sanitation, public health, agriculture, energy, climate and employment. However, without a single point of responsibility, it becomes a fragmented mandate.

Unfortunately, the assets created under various schemes is measured while failing to measure the intended outcome: resource recovery. Unknown accountability As mentioned in a recent report by the Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW), responsibility for managing organic waste is distributed across 16 Ministries and government bodies; accountability for the complete chain remains obscure. As an example, when a gram panchayat decides to make a community compost pit, the technical blueprint and targets are set by the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Swachh Bharat Mission-Grameen); the local village council or panchayat raj institution acts as the executor on the ground and the physical labour required to dig the compost pits can be funded using MGNREGS budgets, which come from the Ministry of Rural Development.
