Category: Editorial
Title: Organic waste in India is a wasted Part Two

Organic waste in India is a wasted opportunity

There may be further schemes and subsidies targeting agricultural residue, horticultural waste and cattle dung; each intervention may be useful in isolation and may solve some problems. Together, however, they do not necessarily evolve into a coordinated local resource-management system and, in the process, miss the real objective, which should be resource recovery. CEEW (2026) estimates that improved management of urban organic waste could unlock a market opportunity of nearly $51 billion by 2047, attract $24 billion in investments and create nearly 26 lakh direct jobs.

At the same time, it could significantly reduce methane emissions, improve urban air quality, and strengthen India's clean energy ecosystem through compost, biogas, and bio-CNG production. The prevailing discussion remains centred on urban municipal waste. Rural India contributes a significant share of the country's total waste generation.

Moreover, agricultural residue, animal waste and biowaste in rural areas belong within a wider organic resource economy and therefore form the right substrate for resource recovery in the larger picture of waste management. The issue, however, is that the data, where it exists, is scattered across Ministries, resulting in lack of an integrated information source which acts as an impediment to a vision for a composite resource-recovery model. The principle that "what cannot be measured cannot be managed" is relevant here.

The mindset through which organic waste is viewed primarily as a sanitation issue, is a limiting thought process that is a barrier to unleashing the potential benefits in terms of nutrients, energy, climate mitigation and employment generation. We hypothesise that organic waste is a significant economic, environmental and social opportunity with great potential for multiple co-benefits. It is a valuable resource which, if tapped appropriately, can provide a nutrient base for agriculture, which is largely dependent upon imported fertilizer.

Data integration There may be data, but it exists in silos and sits across different government systems. There is a need for data integration to formulate a systemic response to composite organic waste in the country. The cropping patterns of agricultural land is known and the agricultural waste that would be generated from it can be projected.

The livestock census in each area could also provide an estimate of animal waste available for processing. From the waste-generation data of an area, estimates can be made of the organic waste expected to be generated. Collating this disparate data will help develop a vision for resource recovery at an appropriate geographical scale.

Three reforms suggested may be fundamental to bringing the scattered efforts into an integrated system. First, there is a need to develop an organic-resource inventory that covers all sources of organic waste linked to a unit of governance. The inventory can have quantity, quality and seasonality of the materials, their existing users and competing claims over it.

As an example, agricultural residue already used as fodder, fuel or soil cover can be classified as a well-utilised resource. Second, to combine the benefits and co-benefits of numerous schemes and subsidies, the primary task should be to achieve a bigger purpose of resource recovery and establish a clear objective and accountability. The third and final link is the development of a dependable market for recovered products.

Quality compost and biochar help improve moisture retention and nutrient efficiency, it sequesters carbon and is also aligned with national climate priorities. This will reduce the imported fertilizer burden and abate local air pollution. India already has laws, schemes, technologies and institutions.
