Category: Editorial
Title: Our parched cities need to make every drop Part Two

Our parched cities need to make every drop count, recycle water

Beyond poor plant maintenance, used water is often mixed with industrial effluents from non-conforming units in unauthorised areas, impairing plant operations. Most of the water treatment plants operate on biological processes that rely on microorganisms. The heavy metals and toxins in industrial effluents kill the bacteria or make them dormant.

Although India does have a zero-liquid discharge (ZLD) policy for industries, many small-scale units flout norms and release untreated effluent into drains carrying domestic wastewater. As adopted by cities in the Ganga river basin, local governments can leverage innovations in technology and AI to monitor violations and improve compliance of the plants. Further, they can provide incentives to the industries that follow the rules on proper implementation of ZLD.

Cities in Gujarat that offer financial assistance to industries for setting up ZLD policies are good examples. Fourth, create a national circular water mission to shift water management from a linear use-and-dispose approach to a restorative model that maximises its reuse. This will require technological, institutional, financial, and behavioural reforms.

Technological reforms should target building more decentralised faecal sludge treatment plants in the growing peri-urban areas. Institutional reforms are needed to enable urban local bodies to set up special-purpose instruments to manage reuse projects and convert them into a business opportunity. Financial instruments must be designed to incentivise those reusing treated used water and reclassify freshwater as an asset class.

While the introduction of market-based freshwater pricing for all users should drive efficiency, targeted subsidies must be maintained to protect those at the base of the economic pyramid. Lastly, but importantly, are the behavioural nudges to make used water everyone's business. By shifting public perception, treated used water and its reuse can be made an essential component of life in a city.

The recently published study, 'Water, Nature, Progress,' and the Economic Survey of India 2025-26 have laid down the roadmap for a circular water mission in India. India's journey to Viksit Bharat by 2047 will depend on how boldly it builds water resilience. A circular water economy can be the lighthouse  -  it can reduce freshwater stress, improve water quality, and secure water for all.

India has the political leadership, will, and proof of concept. What it needs now is action  -  at scale, at speed, and with urgency. Written by: Parameswaran Iyer, Arunabha Ghosh, Nitin Bassi Iyer is India's executive director at the World Bank, Ghosh is founder-CEO CEEW, and Bassi is fellow at CEEW.

Views are personal
