Category: Editorial
Title: Persian deadlock

Persian deadlock

Donald Trump should lift the blockade for Iran to keep the Strait open President Donald Trump's decision to extend the ceasefire with Iran indefinitely underscores the wide gap between his social media victory declarations and the ground reality in the Persian Gulf. Mr. Trump, who, along with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, launched the war on Iran on February 28, claims that all of Iran's military capabilities have been destroyed.

Yet, he appears to have no viable military option to reopen the Strait of Hormuz, which Iran's Navy shut after the war began. He also said that Iran was begging for a deal because it had no other choice, but Tehran, in open defiance, refused to send a delegation to Pakistan for a second round of talks with the U.S. Snubbed by Iran and with no viable military options as the two-week ceasefire neared expiry, Mr.

Trump on Wednesday extended the truce while maintaining the blockade on Iranian ports to keep up the economic pressure. This is the second time in two weeks that he has taken a U-turn, suggesting that he is seeking a way out of the deadlock. When Mr. Trump announced the ceasefire on April 8, a key sticking point was Israel's war in Lebanon.

Last week, he forced Mr. Netanyahu to declare a limited ceasefire in Lebanon following which Iran said it would open the Strait of Hormuz for commercial traffic, raising hopes for a settlement. But instead of advancing the diplomacy, he set the process back by announcing that he would not lift the U.S.

blockade of Iranian ports. Iran swiftly reversed its decision and tightened its control over the Strait. When the U.S. seized an Iran-flagged vessel in the Gulf of Oman, apparently to increase pressure on the country's leadership, Iran cancelled the talks altogether. Mr. Trump's extension of the ceasefire is only a tactical pause, not an end to the war.

None of the outstanding issues  -  Iran's nuclear programme, its control of the Hormuz Strait and U.S. sanctions  -  has been resolved. If the strategic deadlock persists, keeping Iran and the global economy on the brink, one of the parties could again resort to violence to break the impasse. The logical next step is to kickstart talks.

For that, Mr. Trump needs to accept the new strategic reality. He wants Iran to bend, but his threats are hardening its position, and the blockade is only deepening the mutual mistrust. He cannot demand a deal one day and threaten to kill Iranian leaders and erase its civilisation the next. If he wants a negotiated exit, he should lift the blockade in return for Iran easing its restrictions on the Strait of Hormuz.

Tehran, too, should step back from maximalist positions and be ready to make concessions on the nuclear front in exchange for sanctions relief and security guarantees. What West Asia needs is economic and strategic stability, not forever wars.
