Category: Editorial
Title: Poison in the food

Poison in the food

India needs cogent policy to regulate pesticide use The Centre must quickly follow up on its intent to impose a nationwide ban on paraquat dichloride, a herbicide or weedicide which has been linked to kidney failure, lung fibrosis and Parkinson's disease. As reported by this newspaper, Telangana has banned paraquat with effect from April, but the ban cannot be pushed beyond a couple of months under the present set of laws. While there seems to be ample medical evidence to establish the toxicity of paraquat, the onus is now on the Centre to take the matter forward.

A 'Registration Committee' will presumably decide on whether the ban should be enforced for longer period. Under the proposed Pesticides Management Bill, 2025, which also looks into the illegal sale of pesticides and the regulatory systems needed, the Centre or States can enforce a ban for a year. The Committee will then review the pesticide over a year and take a call.

The growing application of pesticides  -  herbicides, weedicides and insecticides  -  is explained by several factors. They are used more in irrigated areas where the cost of cultivation, and therefore, of any crop loss, is high. Changing monsoon patterns, particularly dry spells, might have contributed to increased pesticide use.

Contract farming in horticulture, where certain quantities have to be supplied regardless of the situation, too leads to increased use of such inputs. The absence of labour or machines to take care of weeds works as a factor. Finally, incorrect application of fertilizer, such as uneven broadcasting of urea in paddy, also invites pest attacks.

The policy challenge here is two-fold: first, curtailing the production and sale of lethal pesticides, and establishing liability in the event of damage; and second, promoting a range of cropping techniques  -  besides less input-intensive crops -  in order to deal with the challenge of pest attacks. State governments and agri universities are evolving sustainable agriculture practices that promote soil and plant health. The Tamil Nadu Agriculture University has been working on integrated weed management, which entails using mechanical, biological and permissible chemical methods instead of weedicides such as paraquat or glyphosate (banned for being carcinogenic, but circulated freely).

It recommends hand weeding, inter-cultivation, crop rotation, mulching, flooding in rice fields and prudent use of safer herbicides. In the case of millets and pulses, inter-cropping and hand weeding a month after sowing is effective. Organisms such as Mexican beetle are effective against weeds. A shift away from intensive cultivation of paddy and wheat (paddy accounts for a lion's share of pesticides use) and towards millets and pulses will do soil and plant health some good.

Crucially, traditional varieties of rice should be promoted. Detoxifying agriculture is not about going 'organic'  -  but about creating a bouquet of applications.
