Category: Editorial
Title: Positioning workers at the centre of Indias Part Two

Positioning workers at the centre of India's migration policies

Strengthening transparency and accountability in this manner will incentivise agencies to minimise reliance on intermediaries and adopt more direct, responsible recruitment practices. Synergising skills and labour migration Skills are becoming pivotal in shaping the nature and patterns of global migration flows. Policies to advance skill-centric international labour migration must encompass the full spectrum of skills  -  low, medium, and high  -  rather than focusing predominantly on highly skilled mobility.

A truly effective approach requires situating skills within a comprehensive migration cycle framework, with coordinated interventions at every stage: pre-departure, employment abroad, and return with reintegration. In the pre-migration phase, the emphasis should be on targeted, demand-driven training aligned with clearly identified skill shortages and job requirements in destination labour markets. Selected vocational education and training institutions  -  such as designated Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) in regions with high migration intensity  -  should be upgraded as Centres of Excellence, capable of delivering world-class training and supporting pathways to better-quality international employment.

At the destination, strong measures are needed to ensure that migrant workers are employed in roles that match their certified skills and contractual terms, thus preventing deskilling. India must proactively engage with destination-country authorities to facilitate formal recognition of skills acquired abroad  - whether through on-the-job learning or further training  -  ensuring that migrants return with portable and accredited competencies. Skill assessment conducted both pre-departure and post-arrival can be an effective instrument to support successful reintegration, enabling returning migrants to leverage newly acquired skills for productive reinsertion into the domestic labour market.

Such an integrated and skill-responsive approach will enhance the developmental gains from international labour migration for workers, their families, and the economy. Outcome-oriented bilateral agreements Despite their economic indispensability, migrant workers are concurrently exposed to an evolving spectrum of complex vulnerabilities. These include the destabilising effects of geopolitical tensions, the rise of restrictive nationalist policies, and disruptions in global trade networks, all of which compromise their security and welfare.

Considering that the influence of multilateral instruments is declining in migration governance, despite the explicit inclusion of migrant-centred targets within the Sustainable Development Goals, 2030 Agenda, India should forefront bilateral agreements with destination nations that focus on the rights, security, and welfare of migrant workers. The outcomes and effectiveness of such bilateral agreements, including those signed in recent years, should be rigorously evaluated to ensure they deliver promised worker protection and welfare. India's global standing as a migration powerhouse must be matched by an uncompromising dedication to the dignity and empowerment of its workers.

Placing migrant workers at the centre of policy is not just good governance  -  it is a strategic necessity, and an investment in India's future. S.K. Sasikumar is a labour and migration analyst and former senior faculty at V.V. Giri National Labour Institute; views expressed are personal
