Category: Editorial
Title: PPP Reimagining national resource management Part One

PPP: Reimagining national resource management

The common prevalent notion is that the Government has no business being in business. Is it time to move beyond and take a leap from PPP 1.0 to PPP 2.0, with Public being replaced with People as far as the management of national resources is concerned? Nature-based Solutions (NBS) can be, and must be, taken forward with People at the forefront, as they are the most vulnerable and victims of climate change and resultant warming; and they must be placed at the front as leading partners.

This will help in bringing all the stakeholders-Public, People or Private Entity-on the same footing and on the same page, as all of them will carry equal weightage, which will help in creating an inclusive and equitable societal order without any frills. A case in point is the Forest Conservation Amendment Act, 2023, allowing industries to take up plantations on forest land, particularly degraded forest lands, aimed at enhancing green cover in the country. This is in line with the National Forest Policy 1988 goal of bringing one-third of the land area under forest or tree cover from the current level of approximately one-fourth.

In the mountainous Himalayan state of Himachal Pradesh, two Ayurvedic manufacturers, using bio-resource material for the production of plant-based formulations, have come forward to collaborate and work closely with people residing in rural areas to cultivate medicinal and herbal species. One of these, a leading company, shall provide free-of-cost plants to people for raising on their private lands or to farmers for growing on farmland as per feasibility assessments. Dabur India Limited has signed an MoA to supply 1.2 million plants every year without any charge to local people, and this free distribution shall continue for the next 10 years.

The company has agreed to create awareness, impart technical know-how to the people, in addition to having a buy-back arrangement with the growers of these medicinal and herbal produce. The Department of Forest and Ayurveda under the State Government shall have a limited mandate of facilitating and providing a common platform to People and Private entities to coordinate, collaborate and cooperate to take forward the objectives of mutually signed agreements. This will pave the way for the scientific propagation of herbal plants with the twin objectives of enhancing local rural livelihoods and ensuring quality herbal produce for the manufacture and preservation of traditionally harvested forest and conservation areas.

A similar approach has been taken by the State Government in the field of climate change projects in the state, such as India's first state-supported biochar production programme. Under the Biochar Project, forest-based bio-resources will be used to convert them into biochar, which shall help in protecting forests from forest fires and also create avenues for local people's livelihood enhancement. A tripartite Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) in this regard was signed between Y S Parmar University of Horticulture and Forestry, Nauni, the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department, and ProClime Services Private Limited, Chennai.

The initiative will not only create employment opportunities but also help the State to secure carbon credits. ProClime, through the Forest Department, will engage local communities in sustainable biomass collection, and the participants will be paid per kg of biomass collected, with performance-based incentives for maintaining quality and quantity. The programme is expected to generate nearly 50,000 person-days of income annually through biomass collection, along with direct employment in plant operations.
