Category: Editorial
Title: Preparing India for a credible digital Census Part One

Preparing India for a credible digital Census

It requires accuracy, safeguards, training and careful planning The house listing phase of the 2027 Census is now progressing in some States and the work in other States will be taken up soon. The questionnaire for this phase was pre-tested last year. It was reported that the inclusion of questions on caste has delayed the pre-testing of the questionnaire for the population enumeration phase of the Census.

Field testing of the schedules is essential to ensure that the concepts and definitions are easily understood by the enumerators and respondents. The question on caste is being included in the Census for the first time since Independence. The only recent experiences on the issues relating to enumeration of caste are from the surveys in Bihar and Karnataka.

I am sure that the Census organisation would have conducted extensive research on the issues and possible solutions, and the pre-testing would help streamline the questions and instructions. The experience of Karnataka and Bihar suggests that, whatever the results, there will be communities that are not ready to accept their numbers. The population figures from the 2027 Census will be used for the next delimitation of Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assembly constituencies.

Neither the Constitution nor any other law talks about whether the Census has to count people on de jure or de facto basis. Census on de jure basis would mean that people have to be counted at the place where they reside. On the other hand, a de facto census would count people at the place where they are present during the Census.

The method used The Indian Census has been following an extended de facto method. People found at their usual/normal place of residence when the enumerator visits the household, as well as members who are absent at that time but have stayed there for at least one night during the Census enumeration period, which normally lasts 20 days, are also enumerated. Also included are visitors who stayed with the household throughout the entire period of Census enumeration.

A household is defined to include all members, even if unrelated, who partake food from a common kitchen. Thus, household help living with household and paying guests should be enumerated there, if they have food from the same kitchen. This enumeration process implies that the number of voters in an area may not correspond to the population enumerated there.

A six-month residence is required for registration as a voter. Further, the voters' list would include those living abroad (non-resident Indians, or NRIs) who chose to register as a voter, whereas they are not part of the census at all. According to the Ministry of External Affairs, there are about 1.58 crore NRIs living abroad.

This is more than 1% of the population of the country. If they were all counted in the Census in one State, it would get at least five Lok Sabha seats in the next delimitation. While the NRIs may be from across the country, some States have proportionately more NRIs than others. Kerala, Gujarat, Punjab, Telangana and Tamil Nadu are known to have a significant number of people living abroad.

The Kerala Migration Survey 2023 has estimated that about 22 lakh people from the State are living/working abroad. Not including them in the population of the State would result in the loss of one Lok Sabha seat. Some other States may also be similarly affected. Some countries collect data on non-residents in the census by enumerating family members, if any, living abroad.
