Category: Editorial
Title: Primed to treat On Kerala and Nipah

Primed to treat: On Kerala and Nipah

The Kerala story in containing Nipah has lessons for pandemic preparedness The emergence of a case of the Nipah virus in Kerala and the subsequent control in the State is indicative of two things: first, Kerala's own mix of ecological factors and anthropogenic activity that makes it vulnerable every monsoon season to the possibility of Nipah spreading, the hosts being fruit bats. Second, the fact that there has been just a single case so far is testament to the robustness of the health systems in place in Kerala. The World Health Organization (WHO) has classified Nipah a priority pathogen, accounting for its lethality, potential to cause outbreaks, even a pandemic.

It is just one of several pathogens that WHO has flagged for Kerala  -  including avian influenza and Kyasanur Forest Disease. Kerala has, at the moment, one active case of 43-year-old man from Ramanattukara in Kozhikode. He remains on ventilator support at the Kozhikode Government Hospital. No fresh cases have come up since then, after intensive contact tracing and screening.

The 2018 Nipah outbreak, immortalised in film and art, which caused 17 deaths, and affected 23 people (18 lab confirmed), spread primarily on person-to-person contact, with the index patient reportedly transmitting the virus to 15 others, including health-care workers. Since then it has had cases/outbreaks in 2019, 2021, 2023, 2024, and 2025. Historically in India, a devastating outbreak was noted in 2001 in West Bengal, and later, a few cases were detected again, in 2007.

Earlier this year, on January 26, 2026, two laboratory-confirmed cases of Nipah virus infection were reported from West Bengal, both health-care workers. This was also contained and no further cases were reported. It is clear that human activity on the fringes of forest zones, encroaching into traditional habitats of the fruit bats, has a central role to play in the transmission of the virus; in time, this originally zoonotic infection jumped to humans.

Repeatedly, the source of infection has been traced to consuming contaminated fruits, or contact with water sources contaminated by bats. This also indicates that the overall approach should be from a One Health perspective, considering environmental and animal interplays with humans, and not a mere health-care angle. The State's history of Nipah outbreaks and its learnings have enabled it to prime its health system to meet such health emergencies, at the primary and secondary hospitals itself.

This is the other lesson from Kerala for pandemic preparedness. Its system has become adept at maintaining a high index of suspicion for cases of acute encephalitis; watching out for clusters, and with clinical efficiency, deploying protocols to control further spread and reach all those who need medical assistance.
