Category: Editorial
Title: Protests at Indian high commission in Dhaka

Protests at Indian high commission in Dhaka: Insulate India- Bangladesh ties from short-term politics

In Dhaka: Insulate India-Bangladesh ties from short-term politics Delhi must be careful not to take political sides in Dhaka, while sticking to its core principles. The political class in Bangladesh, for its part, needs to show maturity ahead of the election The protests at Indian diplomatic outposts, including the High Commission in Dhaka, are concerning. They also carry a disquieting portent for a bilateral relationship that was, until recently, arguably Delhi's greatest success in the neighbourhood.

The demand for the repatriation of Sheikh Hasina by the group marching under the banner of "July Oikya" and the anti-India rhetoric of National Citizen Party leader Hasnat Abdullah, threatening to provide shelter and support to separatists from northeastern states, less than two months before the general elections, show just how deeply politicised bilateral ties have become. Delhi has summoned the Bangladesh High Commissioner and made its concerns known. However, the leadership at the highest level in both countries must prioritise the need to repair the relationship.

With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that India underestimated the depth of support for the student-led uprising and the anger against Sheikh Hasina. During the protests and in their aftermath, certain sections on both sides of the border further polarised the conversation by invoking historical social and communal fissures in the Subcontinent. In the age of 24/7 news and WhatsApp forwards, irresponsible rhetoric cannot but affect the tenor of ties with an important neighbour.

On its part, the interim government in Dhaka has done little to bridge the domestic political divide. As Sajeeb Wazed Joy, Sheikh Hasina's son, underlined in an interview to this newspaper, the Awami League has been a major political force in Bangladesh since its formation, and the ban on the party from contesting will cast a shadow over the election. By excluding the Awami League from the political process, the interim government is repeating Hasina's mistakes.

It is important for Delhi and Dhaka to recall the realities of geography, history, culture, geopolitics and economics that cannot be wished away. Both countries have made strides in trade, tackling insurgencies, sharing river waters and policing the shared 4,096-km land border. India must communicate to the people of Bangladesh as much as its government that the bilateral story is about two societies, regardless of the government in power.

Delhi must be careful not to take political sides in Dhaka. The political class in Bangladesh, for its part, needs to show maturity ahead of the election. In the long term, both countries have much to gain by building back the relationship.
