Category: Editorial
Title: Putins visit to India and the aftermath Part Two

Putin's visit to India and the aftermath

However, this has been belied, as the optics of the latest visit indicate. The West, especially the U.S. and countries of the European Union, are certain to be disappointed at the outcome. Apart from the public display of warmth by the Indian Prime Minister and the Russian President on the latter's arrival in Delhi, the relationship between the two countries, often touted as a relationship carved in stone, remains unaffected.

The Joint Statement issued following the 23rd India-Russia Annual Summit makes this clear. Support for a further strengthening of the Special and Privileged Strategic Partnership between India and Russia (marking the 25th Anniversary of the Declaration of Strategic Partnership between India and Russia), for instance, remains unchanged. The statement reiterates the special nature of the longstanding time-tested relationship characterised by mutual trust and respect for each other's core national interests.

The Joint Statement further envisages exploring new avenues for cooperation, while strengthening cooperation in traditional areas. The optics of the visit were, hence, excellent. The media coverage exceeded expectations. The body language demonstrated by the two principals left nothing to be desired.

There were more than the usual references to connectivity, and cooperation on transport corridors, especially on the Northern Sea route through the Arctic, and the Chennai-Vladivostok Eastern Maritime Corridor. Technology and industrial collaboration also found prominent mention. Leaving out defence matters Yet, defence matters, which had so far provided the main spark as far as the relationship was concerned, were conspicuously absent from the Joint Statement.

This has been a core item during the Putin era  -  and unless there was a deliberate decision to maintain diplomatic silence on supposedly controversial aspects and subjects, it would appear that the essence of the India-Russia relationship was changing. The reasons for this have yet to be explained, and give room for deep thought, especially during a period of global flux. The defence relationship and cooperation had always been seen and accepted as the bedrock of India-Russia relations; in this instance, however, it has been pushed into the background as of now.

This is not merely significant, but could mark a shift in India's attitude and approach, which has so far been (at least in defence matters) largely pro-Russia in outlook. India has, of late, diversified its defence purchases to include countries such as Israel and France. Nevertheless, Russia has over the years provided the main sinews for India's defence.

It has been India's most consistent ally in conflicts with countries such as Pakistan, with the latter being consistently backed by the West. It is not merely the consistency of Russian support, but also the quality of many of the items that Russia has been willing to supply India that has added a great deal of heft to India's defence capabilities. At present, as was amply proved during Operation Sindoor in May 2025, Russia's S-400 air and missile defence system (which has acquired a near mythical status and is widely credited with India's success during the conflict), the Brahmos missile that India has jointly developed with Russia, and is a critical part of India's arsenal, apart from items such as the Sukhoi SU-30 MKI, the T-90 Tanks, and transport helicopters, form an integral part of India's defence structure.
