Category: Editorial
Title: Putins visit to India and the aftermath Part One

Putin's visit to India and the aftermath

India and Russia adroitly handled the situation, and in a manner that gave little reason for satisfaction to the West, even while maintaining a veneer of strategic autonomy Russian President Vladimir Putin's visit to India (December 4 and 5) for the India-Russia Annual Summit had sparked a great deal of interest across the world, apart from India itself, though for different reasons. The West, which since the Ukraine conflict in 2022, has boycotted the Russian President, was keen to see how the visit would turn out, and whether it would undermine the embargo they had imposed on him for reasons that are well known. The Elephant and the Bear, however, managed to adroitly handle the situation, and in a manner that gave little reason for satisfaction to the West, even while maintaining a veneer of strategic autonomy.

A deep connection Meetings between the heads of state of India and Russia have always been viewed as seminal events. They have often produced transformative results. Few in India can possibly forget how the India-Soviet Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation signed between the two countries in 1971, when Indira Gandhi was the Prime Minister of India and Leonid Brezhnev was the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, transformed the strategic landscape of South Asia.

It enabled India to defeat Pakistan and ensure the liberation of East Pakistan, which became the nascent state of Bangladesh. Less significant, but reminiscent of Russia's willingness to extend its hand of friendship to India, was Mr. Putin's gesture in 2009 during a summit meeting with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of waiving penalties to enable India to secure its second aircraft carrier supplied by Russia.

Other instances, not all of it known to the outside world, but significant in so far as the close friendship between the leaders of the two countries, also exist. This has been the glue sustaining a relationship born out of mutual accommodation and faith. The closeness of the relationship has often irked the West, which, even as it tilted towards Pakistan most of the time and railed against India's policy of non-alignment, viewed Russia's backing for India as an anti-West manoeuvre.

After 1971, the India-Russia relationship took on a fresh dimension, and since the Gorbachev era in Russia, India-Russia ties have gone from strength to strength. The presidency of Mr. Putin for the past quarter of a century further cemented the friendship. Successive Indian Prime Ministers have sustained this relationship.

The Russia-Ukraine war, however, became a test case in so far as India-Russia relations were concerned; India maintained strict neutrality, but it refused to join the anti-Russia bandwagon. This has since been a point of contention between India and the West. The recent visit of the Russian leader is his first to India after the West imposed embargo on visits and meetings.

Mr. Putin's Delhi visit was, hence, invested with far greater interest than might otherwise have been the case. An earlier summit between the Indian and Russian leaders had taken place in Tianjin (in China), where Mr. Putin and Mr. Modi had displayed a great deal of warmth towards each other. This had, however, been anathema to the West.

The Joint Statement Relations between Russia and the West have, if anything, deteriorated further ever since. Some in the West were possibly anticipating a shift in the content of the India-Russia relationship given the current flux in global politics, U.S. President Trump's heightened tariffs on India for continuing to purchase Russian oil in the wake of the conflict in Ukraine, and other aspects.
