Category: Editorial
Title: Reclaiming footpaths for people Part Two

Reclaiming footpaths for people

Instead, the court ordered their removal on the grounds that no one has the right to use public property for private purposes without authorisation and that the public's right to use pavements for passage takes precedence over the slum-dwellers' claim to occupy them. Spatial inequality Yet, the same state that evicts pavement dwellers with great zeal has turned a blind eye to a much larger occupant of public space: the parked car. Planners typically account for 23 sq.

m of land for parking an average-sized car. According to the CSE's analysis in 2009, in the business district of Connaught Place in New Delhi, the rent of such an area could be as high as ₹36,000 a month. Cars and their associated parking needs raise serious questions of spatial equality in cities such as New Delhi.

While cars remain parked for 90-95% of their lifecycle and occupy over 10% of the city's land area, the entire slum population of Delhi occupies only 3%, with low-income housing for a family unit being built under 25-40 sq. m. Added to this is the rapid rise in SUV ownership across India, which has triggered the demand for even larger parking spaces, well beyond the average 23 sq.

m. Lines of parked cars blocking entire lanes on main roads and footpaths are a familiar sight in affluent residential and business districts in cities across India. Not only does on-street parking hinder pedestrians' rights but it has also proven to be a major impediment to the implementation and maintenance of cycling tracks and dedicated bus lanes intended to improve and decarbonise mobility systems.

While cities have built multi-level paid parking infrastructure, they remain heavily underutilised due to the availability of free, unchecked on-street parking on Indian roads. Therefore, the rising number of cars on Indian roads and their unchecked entitlement to public space pose a real threat to realising our fundamental right to footpaths. In line with the Supreme Court's judgment, there has to be an explicit policy recognition of the rights of pedestrians to well-maintained, unencumbered footpaths over that of cars.

This will require rigorous parking management, pedestrian-centric neighbourhood planning, and the political will to enforce these rights on the ground. Srijani Datta is an Oxford-educated Sociologist who writes on development, urban governance and gender. The views expressed are personal."
