Category: Editorial
Title: Regulatory cholestrol is a silent tax Part Two

Regulatory cholestrol is a silent tax clogging India's economy

Treasure hunts are great for children, not for societies or economies. The next phase of Jan Vishwas (trusting citizens) should involve three reforms. The first is an inventory deadline: Six months for every central ministry to adopt the recently formulated Jan Vishwas Siddhant (principles), which interrogate compliances and punishments while requiring obligations to arise only from Acts passed or Rules notified.

Every central ministry (70+) and department (100+) would have to surface their inventory, then notify, modify, or extinguish many instruments and compliances (our estimate is 10,000+). The objective of this exercise is not Poorna Swaraj; it does not target rules but shadows, ambiguity and overreach. The second reform is structural reimagination.

Today, the government publishes Acts, rules, and regulations across the India Code website, the e- gazette, and the physical gazette. Neither is complete; none is digitally legible, and this fragmentation creates uncertainty. Consolidation would involve transferring ownership of the physical gazette from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs to whoever will be accountable for the merged entity.

India Code would then become the front-end: A searchable, sortable, filterable, and subscribable 21st-century machine-readable digital repository of all the laws, rules, regulations, and public orders that a citizen or business needs to comply with. It would be digitally secure and time-stamped, with an exhaustive version history. When the government and citizens are reading the same page, corruption will significantly reduce.

The third reform is legislative certainty: 12 months from now, the central government should offer a "single-source of truth" guarantee to every citizen and entrepreneur  -  if the India code website lists the compliance, it must be complied with. If it's not, it can be safely ignored without fear, favour, or follow-up. This certainty would require either diligent administrative enforcement of the Jan Vishwas Siddhant or the formal passage of a law that articulates, empowers, and enforces the India Code Guarantee.

India's administrative state was once a steel frame. It is now a steel maze at best, and a steel cage, at worst. A recent book by John Straubaugh about the Soviet space programme, titled The Wrong Stuff, a mirror of Tom Wolfe's The Right Stuff, reminds us how an immense, multilayered Soviet bureaucracy bred corruption and inefficiency and undermined mass prosperity.

The USSR tried to compensate for its lack of freedom and innovation by "brute forcing"; yet an omnipotent, omnipresent bureaucracy without accountability and boundaries finally lost legitimacy with citizens. It is hard to put a price on the silent tax of regulatory cholesterol. Our guesstimate is $10,000 per capita GDP since 1991.

The proliferation of hundreds of non-act, non-rule administrative instruments whose "brute force" creates thousands of punishable obligations undermines freedom, sabotages prosperity, and is constitutionally the wrong stuff. They must go. By Manish Sabharwal and Rahul Mathan Sabharwal and Mathan are are co-founders of Teamlease and Trilegal, respectively
