Category: Editorial
Title: Reworking Civil Services remuneration Part Two

Reworking Civil Services remuneration

Aligning the increment structure across all premier services could serve as a catalytic gesture of institutional equity, fostering a more collaborative environment where merit and contribution are recognised through a uniform lens, regardless of the parent cadre. This will help create team spirit within the realms of individual departments' mandates. As far as pensioners' benefits are concerned, there should be complete parity between pre-Pay Commission and post-Pay Commission retirees, i.e., pre-and post-2016 retirees.

Further, as in Himachal Pradesh, considering the rising health expenses in old age, there should be a 10% increase in basic pension after every five years beyond the age of 65 years. In order to ward off a sudden drop in the living standards of a family after the demise of the head of the family as the sole earner, it is necessary to enhance family pension to 50% of the last pay and introduce a one-time ex gratia of ?25 lakh for families of officers who died due to service-related hazards (snakebite, wild animal attacks, Naxal violence, etc.). While financial incentives are important, the moral dimension of public service cannot be overlooked.

The Commission should explore ways to recognise and reward integrity, ethical conduct, and public trust. Awards, accelerated promotions, and public recognition can reinforce these values. At the same time, strict penalties for misconduct must be enforced to maintain the credibility of the system. The 8th Pay Commission should be seen not just as a technocratic body but as a platform to rethink the future of public service.

By embracing innovation, flexibility, and fairness, it can build a compensation system that is both equitable and inspiring. While the Old Pension Scheme's scrapping has not been welcomed, concerns over sustainability can be addressed through measures such as increasing the retirement age to 65 years and reducing unproductive expenditure at both state and central levels. The country must recognise that forests and their biodiversity are not merely a collection of trees and animals but vital resources essential for sustaining life on Earth.

Forest Department officers and staff are performing a great national duty in protecting these life-sustaining resources. However, compared to law-and-order-related duties, their career value is not perceived properly and hence not adequately recognised. "Green Gallantry Medal" awards should be instituted for such officers, with the same financial benefits and ex gratia provisions as police medals.

India's governance machinery needs to be equipped to meet the challenges of the 21st century with competence, commitment, and creativity. Many services have criticised the way the Commission has been constituted, as, barring the Chairperson, there is only one part-time member. The time has come to move from incremental change to transformative reform.

Whatever the recommendations of the Commission, the political leadership must be fair, impartial, forward-looking, and innovative, and must promote and draw competence from across the entire gamut of civil services to ensure an effective delivery system. By VK Bahuguna The writer is former Principal Secretary Government of Tripura and Chairman of Centre for Resource Management ; views are personal
