Category: Editorial
Title: Rupee is more than a measure of price Its Part Two

Rupee is more than a measure of price. It's also a barometer of credibility

Countries like Turkey and Brazil learned that a depreciating currency acts as an immediate tax on the citizenry. As the cost of imported energy and food spiked, the resulting "cost-push" inflation eroded any gains made by exporters, proving that one cannot devalue one's way to long-term wealth if the industrial base relies on imported inputs. The rupee crashed by around 20 per cent.

The RBI hiked short-term rates by 200 basis points, allowed banks to raise foreign currency funds through Foreign Currency Non-Resident (FCNR-B) deposits and swap them at a concessional rate, and offered oil-dollar swaps to ease import bills. The government chipped in with a gold import duty hike from 6-10 per cent to 26 per cent, cut non-plan expenditure by 10 per cent, pruned subsidies (fertiliser decontrol hints), advanced diesel deregulation and recommitted to the FRBM target of 3 per cent overtime. The result: The rupee stabilised, the current account deficit shrank from 4.8 per cent of GDP to 1.3 per cent as oil prices fell and gold curbs bit.

Growth dipped to 5 per cent, but it laid the groundwork for inflation targeting. Cut to 2026. India has reported a BoP deficit for two years in a row and FY26 may well make it the third year in a row. Notably, FPIs inflows were in the positive for only one of the last five years. Moreover, net FDI inflows since Aug- 25 have been negative.

Thus, even a smaller level of absolute CAD has become a funding challenge, creating headwinds for the rupee. Monetary measures (for example, the spate of recent administrative RBI measures, a separate swap window for oil companies, sterilised interventions, tiered reserve requirements etc.) can help but may not suffice, and blunt use of interest rates during a supply shock may only impair growth. Fiscal measures (oil price rejig, subsidy reforms) and broader policy reforms (energy security, distribution reforms, inclusion of energy sector, specifically electricity and petroleum products under GST) will be needed.

With rising repatriation pressurising net FDI, retaining existing investors, not just attracting new ones, through measures such as ease of doing business norms, policy stability, attractive incentives and building long-term investor confidence will be needed to shore up confidence in the currency, as also seen in the past episodes. The lesson for policymakers is clear. The rupee is more than a price; at times like these, it is also a barometer of credibility.

While a modest depreciation can be a useful vent for economic pressure, a chronic fall is a fever that can eventually consume the patient. Stability, not destabilisation, is the true engine of growth. Importantly, even if the US-Iran conflict were to end tomorrow, issues such as tariffs, Section 301 investigations, AI-related fears, geopolitics and BoP weakness could take centre stage and weigh on the currency.

Policymakers, therefore, will need to mount a sustained and coordinated effort to boost confidence in the long-term story. We need all policy hands on the deck. Written by: Sachchidanand Shukla The writer is group chief economist, L&T. Views are personal
