Category: Editorial
Title: Rupee is more than a measure of price Its Part One

Rupee is more than a measure of price. It's also a barometer of credibility

Price. It's also a barometer of credibility For many emerging and developed markets alike, the reality of a currency in freefall is not a boom in exports, but often a harsh blow to purchasing power and investor confidence For some, a certain brand of mercantilist logic has whispered that the currency has to be the only "shock absorber" during an external crisis. And for a few others, a weaker currency is a shortcut to prosperity and competitiveness - a neat trick to boost exports and undercut global rivals.

But as history and economic theory repeatedly demonstrate, when depreciation shifts from a tactical adjustment to a continuing bout, the much-hoped for pressure valve gives way or the hoped-for "competitive edge" quickly dulls, leaving behind a trail of inflationary wreckage and hollowed-out balance sheets. The allure of a depreciating exchange rate lies in its simplicity: It makes ones' goods cheaper for foreigners. However, this is often a Faustian bargain.

For many emerging and developed markets alike, the reality of a currency in freefall is not a boom in exports, but often a harsh blow to purchasing power and investor confidence. Imagine yourself in the shoes of a big global financial investor. How confident will you be in investing a billion dollars if you lose 9-10 per cent in a year due to depreciation?

To understand why currencies often fall farther and faster than fundamentals suggest, Econ 101 refers us to Rudi Dornbusch's overshooting model. Dornbusch observed that because goods prices are "sticky", they change slowly, and as financial markets are "fluid", exchange rates must do the heavy lifting in the short term to reach equilibrium. When a central bank pivots to an expansionary stance, the currency doesn't just settle at its new long-run value; it "overshoots" it, collapsing violently before slowly appreciating back.

For a country already facing a crisis of confidence, this overshooting can trigger a self-fulfilling prophecy of capital flight. This struggle is encapsulated by the Mundell-Fleming Model, which presents the "Impossible Trinity". A country cannot simultaneously have a fixed exchange rate, free capital movement, and an independent monetary policy.

When authorities try to fight market forces during a depreciation bout such as the current one, they often find themselves cornered. If they raise rates to defend the currency, they choke domestic growth; if they let it slide, they import inflation. India's economy and the rupee have faced brutal currency storms before, like the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) in 2008-09 and the 2013 Taper Tantrum, and bounced back smarter.

Following the GFC, the world saw a race to the bottom as nations sought to devalue their way to recovery. However, those with high external debt found that a weaker currency meant their dollar-denominated liabilities swelled in local terms, fuelling corporate insolvencies rather than export miracles. The RBI then slashed its repo rate from 9 per cent to a low 4.75 per cent and cut reserve requirements (cash reserve ratio/statutory liquidity ratio), freeing up Rs 2.25 lakh crore, and rolled out special dollar windows for oil importers and non-banks.

The government also unleashed fiscal firepower: A stimulus package worth 3 per cent of GDP, including excise duty cuts from 14 per cent to 4 per cent (boosting consumer spending) and income tax relief (Rs 67,000 crore). The fiscal deficit ballooned to 6.5 per cent of GDP. Fast forward to the 2013 Taper Tantrum, when the Federal Reserve merely hinted at slowing its bond-buying programme and emerging markets saw their currencies decimated.
