Category: Editorial
Title: Safeguarding Competition and Investment in Part Two

Safeguarding Competition and Investment in the telecom sector

Its debt has fallen. There is every sign that it remains a serious player in India's telecom market. Vodafone Idea case raises reulatory questions It is also important to recognise the implications of Vodafone Idea's challenges. The company is a joint venture between two globally reputable companies, namely Vodafone (UK) and India's Aditya Birla Group.

Its experience raises concerns not only about its management but also about the effectiveness of a regulatory system that allows disputes to remain unresolved for years. The Supreme Court decision provides a rationale and a unique opportunity to reform India's regulatory levy regime. The AGR-based revenue-sharing model was introduced under the National Telecom Policy of 1999 (NTP-1999) to provide relief to private telecom operators that had overbid for licences and struggled to pay due to slow market growth.

The NTP-1999 enabled a shift to revenue sharing, which was initially welcomed but eventually became a source of contention and ongoing litigation, contributing to Vodafone Idea's current predicament. The revenue-sharing system has outlived its usefulness. Today, it encourages inefficiency and demands complex, burdensome compliance.

Unsurprisingly, such a revenue-sharing model is largely absent from advanced regulatory regimes. India cannot justify such an unorthodox and counterproductive system. Replacing the current revenue-sharing approach with a simpler payment system is now a priority. Since these levies are essentially a form of tax, it makes sense to address them within the broader budgetary tax framework.

Collecting them as a 'telecom tax' - which can be adjusted annually and linked to the sector's overall revenues - would not compromise government revenue targets. Importantly, this system can be developed in consultation with stakeholders and the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) to ensure it is both straightforward and enforceable. Removing the existing telecom levies would not just reduce compliance costs.

If designed right, such reform could free up much-needed resources for infrastructure development. This could especially be useful for rural and remote areas with substantial gaps in network capacity and access. These gaps are often obscured by the prevalence of multiple SIM ownership that inflates the number of unique users.

Similarly, India's high mobile data usage also indicates insufficient fibre connectivity and over-reliance on terrestrial wireless technologies. India needs choice not just among players, but also technologies. Substantial resources and strong political resolve are required to build an industry capable of serving India's diverse and aspirational population and a rapidly growing economy.

To tackle the ongoing challenges in the telecom sector, India must build on strategies that have historically driven sectoral growth. Reforming the AGR regime and providing meaningful relief to Vodafone Idea are key steps towards stabilising and sustaining long-term growth in the sector. The new DoT Secretary is well-positioned to design and implement crucial reforms.

If implemented effectively, these reforms could put the telecom sector on a path of sustainable growth and stability, delivering lasting benefits to all stakeholders. Mahesh Uppal heads Com First, which has advised diverse stakeholders on regulatory and policy aspects of telecommunications and the internet.
