Category: Editorial
Title: SC ruling on use of stem cells for autism Part Two

SC ruling on use of stem cells for autism sets a precedent for healthcare regulation

This is strange because stem cells is one area where India has regulations. However, taking advantage of the regulators' inaction, practitioners brazenly advertise this therapy for a host of other conditions for which no cure exists. The charges are exorbitant, running into lakhs per injection. In recent years, NGOs working with autistic children were approached by caregivers who had tried stem cell therapy, but without benefit, despite spending large amounts of money.

Some, in fact, developed unpleasant side effects. That is when a unique alliance of caregivers, NGOs and doctors filed a petition in the Supreme Court in May 2022 challenging its legal permissibility. They also pointed out that even though a regulatory framework exists, it was not enforced. Subsequently, the Ethics and Medical Registration Board of the National Medical Commission deemed stem cell therapy as not recommended.

Further, the use of the therapy, its promotion or advertisement was labelled as professional misconduct. The SC verdict concluded from a perusal of the ICMR and NMC guidelines that the use of stem cells for the treatment of autism is not recommended as routine treatment due to the lack of scientific support for its efficacy. And, that any use must be as an approved and monitored clinical trial.

Also, the use of stem cells outside an approved clinical trial is unethical and constitutes medical malpractice. Medical practitioners using it would attract consequences of professional misconduct, including cancellation of registration and a penalty. The judgment also says that patients have no right to demand unproven therapies outside clinical trials.

This may be a response to the argument that unproven therapies are offered because of patient demand, and they provide "consent" for it. This is a noteworthy part of the judgment which may have far-reaching consequences beyond stem cells and autism. Will the judgment change anything? Will the exploitation of helpless citizens seeking deliverance from disease, suffering and death stop?

We have a long way to go, especially in a country where healthcare's scientific moorings are tenuous and dominated by commerce. Where a wide spectrum of therapies, traditional and modern, holds sway, implementation will not be easy. Understandably, the ability of ordinary people to distinguish scientific therapies from those being peddled for commerce is limited, especially when faced with the prospect of no cure.

They need humane, neutral guidance. There are two gatekeepers  -  regulatory bodies and the medical profession, through its commitment to provide rational care. When they are weak, unwilling or compromised, the task becomes onerous. India's challenge in facing difficult diseases needs both  -  access to newer and proven expensive therapies and protection from dubious ones.

This case offers hope and a model. If an alliance can join forces to protect vulnerable patients, they could also lead the upcoming tougher battle for access. Written by: Sanjay Nagral, Uma Ladiwala Nagral is a surgeon and one of the co petitioners in the case on behalf of the Forum for Medical Ethics.

Ladiwala is a Neuroscientist and stem cell researcher
