Category: Editorial
Title: SC ruling on use of stem cells for autism Part One

SC ruling on use of stem cells for autism sets a precedent for healthcare regulation

Autism sets a precedent for healthcare regulation India is a hot spot for stem cell centres claiming cures for many diseases, and 'medical tourism' for this therapy is a thriving industry. This is strange because stem cells are one area where India has regulations. This is an exciting time in humankind's quest to seek effective treatments for diseases.

Thanks to spectacular advances in science, especially molecular and cellular biology, difficult-to-treat diseases are seeing the emergence of highly effective treatments. For example, we now see cancers melting away with immune or targeted therapy. Gene-based therapies, immunomodulators and transplanting human cells or tissues are breaking barriers as never before.

But outside the developed world, there are huge barriers before these therapies reach ordinary people. They have astronomical costs and are subject to patent laws and monopolisation. This is a bigger battle that will have to be fought even in India. But there is another challenge intrinsic to our healthcare ecosystem.

Lack of scientific protocols, poor regulation and a large private sector seeking to monetise all care result in many new therapies being pushed without proven scientific efficacy. The best way to understand this is by observing the enormous growth of India's stem cell therapy industry, which attracts desperate patients from all over the world with fantastic promises of a cure. Therefore, when on January 30, the Supreme Court delivered a judgment banning the use of stem cells as "therapy" for autism, it was a milestone.

Though it addresses only autism, it sets a precedent for how any novel treatment should be regulated. It unpacks the worrying state of healthcare regulation and predatory commercialisation. The verdict also provides protection for citizens from fraudulent and harmful misuse of expensive medical advances.

Stem cells are unique unspecialised cells, normally present in the embryo, after birth and in adulthood. They self-renew by dividing repeatedly or transform into specialised cells performing different functions. Scientists are trying to harness this property, particularly when the body is unable to self-repair, and no cure exists.

They have been tried in neurological problems like Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's and spinal cord injuries. Their use in most diseases is currently confined to research. Bone marrow transplant, used successfully in treating blood disorders, especially cancers, is a form of stem cell therapy and the only one approved by the US FDA and ICMR.

It is commonly used in India. Autism is a neuro-developmental condition, characterised by social communication deficits and repetitive behaviours. It can usually be managed with behavioural and supportive therapies. Those mildly affected are socially well-integrated, but those with severe disease face difficulties.

Sadly, they are vulnerable to a plethora of unsubstantiated "cures", including stem cell "therapy" In order to determine whether any therapy is effective, well-designed clinical trials are mandatory using a globally accepted method. There have been clinical trials of stem cell therapy in autism, but the results are mostly inconclusive due to poor methodology, inconsistent doses and short follow-ups. High-quality randomised, controlled trials concluded that it was of no benefit for autism.

Besides, the procedure is invasive. Despite claims that it's "safe", data shows worrying side effects such as epilepsy, headache and infection at the site of injection. India is a hot spot for stem cell centres claiming cures not only for autism but also for many diseases, and "medical tourism" for this therapy is a thriving industry.
