Category: Editorial
Title: Science and citizenship Part One

Science and citizenship

Scientists reaffirm their citizenship by speaking up about national issues and they bring to the table their unique scientific way of looking at events, a way that ideally is free of prejudice, political bias, obscurantism, illogicality, and hypocrisy Scientists are ordinary men and women who do science through teaching, research or both. Before they are scientists, they are citizens of a country and have as much of a say as any other citizen in thinking about, talking about or doing something about what they feel is in the best interest of the country in which they live and work. Scientists vote like other citizens and in this sense they say something about national and local issues, though in anonymity.

All this is in accordance with Article 14 of the Constitution and is as it should be. Scientists are not special folk who do something that is esoteric and totally beyond the understanding of the common people and are, therefore, "different" from others. Thinking on these lines has led to a common perception that because scientists are not like ordinary people, they should not comment on national issues that affect everyone.

Many have asked me why I comment on national issues and why I do not "stick to my science", almost implying that I am not qualified to speak about matters that are felt to be outside my science. If one takes this line of thought, we do not understand a lot about what economists, bureaucrats, sociologists, linguists, authors or psychologists do. However, nobody criticises members of these professions when they comment about national issues.

Do the Humanities and the social sciences have a monopoly over commenting about general issues of national concern? Do scientists and technologists fall outside the pale? Curiously, no academic person in the above areas has ever questioned my commenting on national issues. It's more the general public who question me on social media.

The ways and means by which scientists do their work is probably difficult for common people to understand and appreciate. What the general public does not seem to be aware of is that these difficult-to-understand things lead to products, goods and facilities that make the life of ordinary people better and even enjoyable. Over the past 100 years, science has given humanity insulin, silicon chips, nylon, plastics, antibiotics, fertilizers, and digital computers, even the smartphone you are perhaps reading this article on.

Scientists need to talk about national issues in three distinct contexts: they need to alert those in authority to matters in which a scientific input would make for clearer policy determinations; they need to talk about important issues with a scientific underpinning to the general public and explain the underpinning in a way that is understandable to the common citizen; and they should comment about any matter of national concern bringing into board a scientific way of looking at these issues. The first point is illustrated by the example of the rare earth elements (REE) commonly referred to as rare earths. Many in the government realise this is an important topic with serious economic implications.
