Category: Editorial
Title: Science and citizenship Part Two

Science and citizenship

However, several documents and policy statements list metals such as as lithium, manganese, and cobalt as rare earths. A scientist needs to educate the people in government and the general public that the term "rare earths" is applied only to a specific group of 17 metals, and most important, that the properties that make these rare earths economically and geostrategically important are unique to these 17 metals only. The second point pertains to AI which is something that many educated people now know about, and the implications of which will affect all of us, educated or otherwise, in the near future.

By mining existing data on a certain topic, AI makes reasonable projections of future phenomena and events. The key to AI predictions is therefore the data itself. What happens if the data bank is skewed, non-representative or biased? The projections will also be slanted in a particular way. This becomes especially a problem with AI projections, ironically, in the social sciences.

Today's data banks are all heavily U.S.-based. AI projections on geopolitical issues are more likely than not going to reflect the U.S. bias. Scientists need to make politicians, bureaucrats, and the general public aware of such things. The third point concerns scientists speaking out about national issues that have no obvious scientific connection.

An example from our electoral procedures is pertinent. Our elections are conducted on the basis of the winner securing the highest number of votes, the first-past-the-post system. The alternative system, followed incidentally by a majority of electoral democracies, is proportional representation in which the elected persons are decided on the basis of the proportion of votes their parties have received overall.

It is not easy to decide which of these methods is better for a country at a given point in time. My personal belief is that first-past-the-post is probably in its last days in India today, and I have arrived at this conclusion using methods of probability and statistics that most working scientists in any area are familiar with. I have also coupled this with the fact that first-past-the-post has led to a degree of corruption that would not be possible with proportional representation.

So a scientist can indeed look at a national issue through a scientific lens even if the topic under discussion is not strictly of a scientific nature. I feel strongly that scientists reaffirm their citizenship by speaking up about national issues and they bring to the table their unique scientific way of looking at events, a way that ideally is free of prejudice, political bias, obscurantism, illogicality, and hypocrisy. Above all, a scientist's view of things is characterised by that one quality without which that view cannot even exist  -  honesty.

Gautam R. Desiraju is in the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore and UPES, Dehradun; views expressed are personal
