Category: Editorial
Title: Shashi Tharoor writes Real message of Part One

Shashi Tharoor writes: Real message of Trump-Xi G2: India must focus on atmanirbharta

Message of Trump-Xi G2: India must focus on atmanirbharta The single greatest vulnerability exposed by the US-China dynamic is India's economic reliance on Chinese imports, particularly in critical sectors like pharmaceuticals and electronics. The recent meeting between US President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping on the sidelines of the APEC Summit in Busan, South Korea, and Trump's use of the term "G2" to frame the gathering, has raised profound questions for India. Strategic calm between the US and China may reduce global volatility, but it also demands sharper policymaking and diplomacy from us.

Indians realise that the sort of decisive economic clout China displayed at Busan is currently not available to India in its strategic dialogue with the US. Beijing can use its global supply-chain dominance and its massive market size as effective weapons. India, though a growing market, lacks a comparable, single point of pressure to wield with the US that can influence high-level negotiations so effectively.

We have no rare earths to withhold, and we don't buy 12 million tons of American soybeans either. We cannot dictate terms the way China did. For India to achieve comparable diplomatic results, we must focus on developing our own unique points of asymmetric leverage  -  whether in technology, manufacturing scale, or critical minerals  -  to strengthen our hand, both vis-à-vis the US and, critically, in our complex relationship with China.

India's dependence on the US is greater than China's, and that constitutes a key strategic disparity. Unfortunately, we have the same disparity with China too. What works in Beijing's favour when negotiating with India, giving it an inherent advantage in bilateral economic and trade discussions, is that we too are dependent on imports from China, whereas there is nothing we sell them or purchase from them that makes as much of a difference to them (just as the US too has other sources to supply the garments, the gems, the shrimps or the phones we are anxious to sell them).

Trump's apparent warming to China delivers a sharp strategic message to India. For years, New Delhi has operated on the foundational assumption that the US would always view it as a "useful instrument" to constrain or counterbalance a rising China. The unspoken pact of the Indo-Pacific strategy  -  where India's geopolitical weight was seen as crucial to Washington's China strategy  -  has taken a major hit.

The transactional nature of the Trump-Xi deal highlights a clear hierarchy of U.S. interests: for the Trump administration, the relationship with Beijing, driven by the colossal trade deficit and the desire for high-profile deals, remains far more important than the one with New Delhi. This is evident in the differential treatment: While a partial trade truce was quickly struck with China, the US has continued to pressure India with tariffs, even as a bilateral deal with New Delhi is being negotiated.

Indians have lost jobs as a result of US tariffs, while China is being hailed in Trump's social-media posts. The assumption that the US would always have India's back is now obsolete. New Delhi must recognise that its strategic value to Washington is conditional and subject to the vagaries of US domestic politics and the immediate priority of managing the relationship with the peer competitor, China.
