Category: Editorial
Title: Shashi Tharoor writes A new world order Part One

Shashi Tharoor writes: A new world order needs a credible architect. India must claim that role

World order needs a credible architect. India must claim that role When India remains passive as expletive-laden threats fly and violations of the UN Charter multiply, it risks losing the very credibility that makes it a leader of the Global South. It is time for a proactive, principled diplomacy The annals of history are often written in the ink of unintended consequences.

As the fragile ceasefire enters its second week, the US naval blockade takes effect in the Strait of Hormuz. With potential escalations threatening mayhem, the world finds itself staring at a landscape transformed by a conflict few desired and none can claim to have won. For India, a nation that historically prides itself on its moral heritage, this crisis has exposed the fragility of our energy security and our lack of leverage with the big powers.

But more importantly, it has presented a moment of existential choice: In the wake of the collapse of the peace negotiations, will India continue to hedge its bets in the shadows of giants, or will it stand up to be counted as a principled architect of a new, durable global order? The Iran war, launched under the banner of "Operation Epic Fury", was framed by Washington as a surgical necessity  -  a mission to degrade Iran's nuclear capabilities and proxy networks. Yet, as the war dragged into its second month, the goalposts shifted with dizzying frequency.

From regime change to the desperate restoration of maritime navigation, the shifting objectives revealed a fundamental truth: Modern warfare is a blunt instrument incapable of resolving geopolitical problems surgically. The primary casualty of this military hubris was the Strait of Hormuz. By attempting to "secure" the region, the offensive triggered the very insecurity it sought to prevent: A blockade of the strait.

The result was a self-inflicted irony of global proportions: US President Donald Trump called the reopening of the strait his major war aim, though the strait had been open and functioning smoothly till the war began, and then announced a blockade himself! As of today, we have a stalemate. There is talk of peace negotiations resuming on Friday in Islamabad, while an economic chokehold is applied to Iran against a backdrop of threats and attacks that leaves every underlying tension unresolved and the region more volatile than ever.

In the arithmetic of this war, the big winners (and some of the losers) were not those on the battlefield. Russia, despite its own war in Ukraine, found a lifeline in the chaos. As global attention drifted away from Eastern Europe, Moscow saw surging revenues from booming (and temporarily sanction-free) energy sales.

China, too, emerged as a quiet net beneficiary. By settling discounted Iranian crude in yuan rather than petrodollars, Beijing accelerated the de-dollarisation of the global economy without firing a shot. And as the US, once the guarantor of world order, behaved as its biggest disruptor, China's statesmanlike restraint enhanced its global image.

The big losers were the Gulf countries, forced to confront the fragility of their prosperity and the precariousness of their security, and the broader region, including India, whose economies were imperilled by new gas and related shortages. NATO allies, wary of a conflict that seemed driven by whim rather than collective security, largely declined direct involvement. This sparked Trump's renewed questioning of the alliance's utility, raising ominous dilemmas for European security.
