Category: Editorial
Title: Shashi Tharoor writes The Trojan Horse of Part One

Shashi Tharoor writes: The Trojan Horse of delimitation, and fundamental questions about the design of our democracy

Trojan Horse of delimitation, and fundamental questions about the design of our democracy We must ask ourselves if a model of parliamentary representation designed in the mid-20th century is still suitable for a sprawling, diverse nation of 145 crore people with such vast disparities among its constituent units The defeat of the trifecta of Bills in the Lok Sabha has already been disingenuously portrayed by the Treasury benches as a setback for Indian women. Let us be clear: The rejection was not a vote against women's representation  -  a cause for which there is near-unanimous consensus across the aisle  -  but a decisive stand against a legislative Trojan Horse. Under the noble guise of the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam, the government attempted to smuggle in an ill-conceived delimitation exercise that would have fundamentally skewed the arithmetic of our Union and devastated our democracy.

By tethering the long-overdue empowerment of women to the demographic volatility of a redrawing of boundaries, the government sought to use a moral imperative as a shield for a political land-grab. There is no logical or constitutional reason why women cannot be granted their 33 per cent reservation today, based on our existing parliamentary strength. Instead, the government presented a "Buy One, Get One Free" offer that no self-respecting federalist could accept.

The idea was just like the disastrous demonetisation  -  "pass in haste, repent at leisure". To accept these Bills was to accept a "political demonetisation" that would have effectively disenfranchised states that have successfully implemented national goals of population control and human development; it would have rendered small states irrelevant and punished major contributors to the exchequer by rewarding economic excellence with political irrelevance. The Opposition has done the nation a favour by warding off such a catastrophe.

But we should be grateful to the government: Its over-reach offers us a providential opportunity to examine fundamental questions about the very design of our democracy, nearly eight decades after Independence. We must ask ourselves if a model of parliamentary representation designed in the mid-20th century is still suitable for a sprawling, diverse nation of 145 crore people with such vast disparities among its constituent units. As we look toward the inevitable results of the next Census, we are confronted by a demographic divergence that threatens our federal fabric.

On one side stand states, primarily in the south, that have governed well, curbed population growth, and invested in the education and health of their citizens. On the other are states where population growth has been rampant. If we adhere to a simplistic "one person, one vote" formula, we perversely reward failure and penalise success.

We risk creating a Union where a handful of states, by virtue of their demographic weight alone, can dominate the national discourse and the national exchequer, while those contributing the most to our GDP and social progress find themselves reduced to bystanders in the national conversation. We must, therefore, explore alternative models of representation that can balance the rights of individual citizens with the rights of the constituent units, since the Constitution calls us a "Union of States". In the United States, the Connecticut Compromise solved a similar deadlock by creating a bicameral system where the House reflects population, but the Senate treats every state as an equal, regardless of size.
