Category: Editorial
Title: Shashi Tharoor writes The Trojan Horse of Part Two

Shashi Tharoor writes: The Trojan Horse of delimitation, and fundamental questions about the design of our democracy

In the European Union, the principle of degressive proportionality ensures that while larger nations have more weight, smaller nations are given a minimum threshold of representation that prevents them from being steamrolled, and bigger states have a ceiling so they do not dominate the Union. It is all very well for the BJP to mouth pieties about "one citizen, one vote, one value", but in a land of such major cultural diversity, how about giving equal importance to "one state, one equal partner, one value"? Then there is the question of whether the proposed solution isn't worse than the disease in our democracy.

Can a Lok Sabha of 850 really have any meaningful discussions, or will it become a notice board and echo chamber, a desi version of the Chinese People's Consultative Conference? In Friday's debate, the Home Minister asked how a single MP could meaningfully represent 30 lakh people. Doesn't the answer lie in a clear division of labour between the more numerous MLAs, who represent smaller units of population in their states, and a smaller set of MPs, whose role could be confined to broader policy questions and larger development issues?

Could we not, perhaps, consider a radical redesign of our own two chambers to balance each other more effectively? Perhaps the Rajya Sabha ought to evolve from a secondary chamber into a true "House of the States" with equal or near-equal representation for all units of the Union, acting as a genuine federal check on the Lok Sabha. We must also confront the elephant in the room: Is it time to reconsider the size of our constituent units?

The sheer administrative and political weight of our largest states often dwarfs that of many sovereign nations. There is a compelling case for breaking up some of these unwieldy behemoths to ensure better governance and a more balanced federal equilibrium. When Mayawati was chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, the legislature passed a resolution urging that the state be divided into four (I have urged, in this column, the establishment of a States' Reorganisation Commission to examine this and related ideas).

These are just some of the issues that need to be considered before the Census triggers the process that makes a future delimitation inevitable. They are not questions that can be answered in a hasty two-day session called without adequate consultation with state governments, political parties, or civil society. What we need is a great national consultation, involving all state chief ministers, all political parties, and civil society.

We must address everything from the fiscal imbalances where tax-contributing states feel exploited, to the political imbalances where performing states feel ignored. The government's defeat is a victory for the spirit of the Constitution. It has hit the "pause" button on a potential disaster and opened a window for a more profound conversation about the nation's future.

Let us pass women's reservation as a standalone measure. But let us also treat the redrawing of our democratic map with the solemnity, the time, and the inclusive consultation it deserves. Our Union is too precious to be sacrificed on the altar of cynical electoral arithmetic. Written by: Shashi Tharoor The writer is Member of Parliament for Thiruvananthapuram, Lok Sabha and the author of India: From Midnight to the Millennium, The Battle of Belonging and other books on Indian nationhood
