Category: Editorial
Title: Shashi Tharoor writes Sergio Gors arrival Part One

Shashi Tharoor writes: Sergio Gor's arrival signals that a reset of India-US ties is within reach

Gor's arrival signals that a reset of India-US ties is within reach The tariff wall, along with disputes over market access and India's pragmatic energy ties with Russia, has transformed the economic landscape from one of cooperation to one of caution. Gor must act as the chief restructuring officer As Sergio Gor officially presents his credentials as the United States Ambassador to India this week, he doesn't merely walk into a diplomatic mission; he enters a crucible. At 38, Gor represents a new breed of diplomat  -  one less interested in the lofty platitudes of shared values and more focused on the hard arithmetic of shared interests.

In the current climate, where diplomacy as traditionally understood has been supplanted by deal-making, Gor possesses the unique Trumpian currency: Direct access. As a trusted member of US President Donald Trump's inner circle, Gor's presence in New Delhi gives India a valuable advantage in the challenge of navigating a revival of the much-vaunted strategic partnership, which seemed to be shuddering to a halt amid trade friction, insulting rhetoric, an indefinitely postponed Quad summit and the calculated snub of India's omission from the initial list of members of the new Pax Silica supply-chain partnership. Gor's arrival marks a pivot from traditional diplomacy to a more transactional, high-stakes deal-making approach.

His youth and proximity to President Trump may be exactly what the bilateral relationship requires to overcome its most turbulent period in decades. India must work with him to strike a deal. However, Gor inherits a relationship currently defined by friction. The 50 per cent punitive tariffs (which rose to this level in August 2025 due to a combination of reciprocal trade measures and penalties for India's Russian oil imports) have caused a 28.5 per cent drop in Indian exports to the US.

Even peace in Ukraine, if it leaves India at 25 per cent, gives Indian exporters a significant disadvantage against rivals like Thailand, Vietnam, Indonesia and Bangladesh, who are tariffed between 15 and 19 per cent. While other officials are conducting the trade negotiations, his primary challenge as ambassador is to resolve this tariff war in ways that his hosts can accept, but without appearing to compromise on Trump's "America First" agenda. The challenges are undeniably steep.

The tariff wall, along with disputes over market access and India's pragmatic energy ties with Russia, has transformed the economic landscape from one of cooperation to one of caution. For Gor, the immediate priority is clear: He must act as the chief restructuring officer of the relationship, shifting the focus from perceived punishment to persistent partnership. However, his arrival signals that the path to a grand reset is within reach  -  and Washington holds the keys to a few significant wins that could define Gor's tenure as a success from the outset.

On his first day in New Delhi as ambassador, he announced a quick win  -  the inclusion of India as a full member of Pax Silica. India's original omission had been a slight, and no doubt an intended one, but as America's most obvious technology partner in the global AI race, with obvious complementarities, India's exclusion meant the US was shooting itself in the foot. Gor's statement makes rapid amends and will be greeted with relief not just by New Delhi but by the other participating countries.
