Category: Editorial
Title: Steady in turbulence On Indias Australia New

Steady in turbulence: On India's Australia, New Zealand ties

India's Australia, New Zealand ties India must build partnerships in this age of global turmoil Prime Minister Narendra Modi's recent visits to Australia and New Zealand marked yet another step in India's efforts to consolidate partnerships across the Indo-Pacific. India's relations with both countries have traditionally been largely economic and people-centric, but the visits underscored an increased emphasis on strategic aspects, a fresh turn. Geopolitical competition, manifested in supply-chain disruptions and the realignment of global economic networks, is keeping the world on tenterhooks, and India has to manage the uncertainties and volatility well to be able to protect its vital interests.

The visits reflected New Delhi's attempt to strengthen the southern arc of the Indo-Pacific under its Act East Policy, MAHASAGAR (Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions) vision, and commitment to a free, open and inclusive Indo-Pacific. India and Australia adopted a new Joint Declaration on Defence and Security Cooperation, significantly upgrading the existing security framework. They agreed to enhance interoperability between their armed forces, expand military exercises, establish an Annual Defence Ministers' Dialogue, and strengthen cooperation in cybersecurity, maritime security and emerging technologies.

An India-Australia Maritime Security Collaboration Roadmap was unveiled to deepen information sharing and operational coordination in the Indo-Pacific. An immediate and consequential outcome was Australia's decision to allow uranium exports for India's civilian nuclear programme, removing a lingering obstacle in ties and boosting India's clean-energy ambitions. Both countries will also find new avenues of cooperation on critical minerals, a specific field of global uncertainty.

India-New Zealand relations are now a formal strategic partnership,with a road map for cooperation over the next four years. Key agreements announced by the countries include maritime cooperation in the Indo-Pacific and mutual logistics support between the Indian Navy and the New Zealand Defence Force. Building upon the recently concluded India-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, both sides agreed to aim for a substantial expansion of bilateral trade by 2030.

Avenues for agricultural cooperation are also being explored. India shares with Australia and New Zealand a concern about maintaining stability and predictability in the Indo-Pacific. Supply-chain diversification, energy security, and access to critical minerals and emerging technology are key priorities for India, which is trying to protect its strategic autonomy in a world of great volatility.

The Modi government has been trying to achieve this objective through building a network of partnerships. These visits fit into that pattern. India's challenge is in keeping itself steady in an era of global turmoil, and untangled from rivalries that can do it no good. Mr. Modi's visits build on this awareness.
