Title: Playing in the Yard
Category: Beginner

The weekend passed quickly. On Monday afternoon, Lily was sitting in her backyard. She was enjoying the late summer weather. Her backyard was quite large, enclosed by a tall wooden fence. There was a large, green oak tree in the corner that provided excellent shade. 

Suddenly, Lily heard a strange noise. It sounded like something hitting the wooden fence. 'Thump... thump... thump.'
She stood up and walked towards the fence that separated her yard from Jack's yard. 
"Hello?" she called out cautiously. 

"Sorry!" a voice called back from the other side. It was Jack. "I am just throwing a tennis ball against the fence. I hope it isn't too loud."
"No, it's fine," Lily answered. "Are you bored?"
"A little bit," Jack admitted. "My mom is still unpacking the fragile things in the kitchen, and she told me to go outside and stay out of the way. I don't really know anyone here yet, so I am just playing by myself."

Lily thought for a moment. She knew what it was like to be bored on a summer afternoon. 
"Why don't you come over here?" Lily suggested. "My yard is a bit bigger, and we could throw a football around if you want."
There was a short pause. "Are you sure?" Jack asked. 
"Yes, of course," Lily said. "Just come through the small wooden gate near the garage."

A minute later, the wooden gate creaked open, and Jack walked into Lily's backyard. He was carrying a brown leather football. He looked much more relaxed than he did on moving day. The stress of moving was finally fading away. 

"This is a really nice yard," Jack said, looking around at the green grass and the large oak tree. "It is much better than my old yard in the city. Our old yard was just a small square of concrete."
"We are very lucky," Lily agreed. "My dad takes very good care of the grass."

Lily went into her garage and brought out two large, padded gloves. They were old baseball gloves that belonged to her and her father. She tossed one to Jack. 
"Put this on your left hand," she instructed. "It makes catching the ball much easier, and it doesn't hurt your fingers."

They stood about ten meters apart on the soft grass. Jack held the brown football, aimed carefully, and threw it towards Lily. The ball spun perfectly in the air in a tight spiral. 
Lily raised her glove and caught the ball with a loud 'smack'. 
"Wow, you throw really hard!" Lily said, shaking her hand slightly. "Do you play on a team?"

"I used to," Jack said, looking a little sad. "I was the quarterback for my middle school team in my old city. But now I have to try out for a completely new team here, and I don't know if I am good enough."
"You are definitely good enough," Lily encouraged him, throwing the ball back. Jack caught it easily. "The team at our school is okay, but they definitely need a strong thrower like you. The tryouts are usually in the second week of September."

"Really? That is good to know," Jack said, sounding more hopeful. He threw the ball again. "Do you play any sports, Lily?"
"I prefer running," Lily answered, catching the ball. "I am on the cross-country team. We run through the woods behind the school. It is exhausting, but I love being in nature."

They spent the next hour throwing the football back and forth. They talked about many different things. Jack told Lily about the loud sirens and the busy traffic in his old city. Lily told Jack about the best ice cream shop in their town and where to find the quietest paths in the local park. 

They discovered they had a lot in common. They both liked the same comedy movies, they both hated mathematics, and they both thought that pepperoni pizza was the best food in the world. 

"Jack!" Mrs. Davis called from the other side of the fence. "Dinner is ready!"
Jack caught the football one last time. He took off the baseball glove and handed it back to Lily. 
"I have to go," he said. "Thanks for playing, Lily. This was a lot more fun than throwing a tennis ball against a fence."
"You are welcome," Lily smiled. "We can play again tomorrow if you want."
"I would like that," Jack said. He walked back through the wooden gate. 

Lily watched him go. She was glad she had invited him over. Playing in the yard and sharing stories was a great way to spend the afternoon. It was much better than reading a book alone on the porch. The empty house next door was no longer empty, and Lily was very happy about that.








