Title: Feeding the Ducks
Category: Beginner

After playing football on the grass, Ben, Mia, and their father sit on a bench to rest. They are tired, but they are not ready to go home yet. The park has one more special place they want to visit. 

"Dad," Mia says. She pulls his shirt sleeve. "Can we go to the pond now? I want to see the ducks."
"Yes, Mia," her father says. "That is a good idea. We can go to the duck pond."
He reaches into the blue backpack. He pulls out a plastic bag. Inside the bag, there are some old slices of brown bread. 
"I brought this bread from home," he explains. "It is a few days old. We cannot eat it, but the ducks will love it."

Mia claps her hands. "Yay! Feeding the ducks!"
Ben likes the duck pond too. It is a quiet and peaceful part of the park. 

They leave the busy playground and walk down a small path. There are many tall trees on both sides of the path. Soon, they see the water. The duck pond is large and round. The water is a dark green color. Around the edge of the pond, there are some wooden benches and a lot of thick, green grass. 

They walk to the edge of the water. At first, the pond looks empty. 
"Where are the ducks?" Mia asks. She looks disappointed. 
"Be patient," her father says. "They are hiding in the tall grass on the other side. They will come when they know we have food."

Her father opens the plastic bag. He takes out a slice of brown bread. He tears the bread into small pieces. He gives some pieces to Ben and some pieces to Mia. 
"Remember," their father says. "Do not throw big pieces. The ducks have small mouths. Throw the small pieces into the water."

Ben takes a small piece of bread. He throws it gently into the water. It makes a tiny splash. 
Mia throws her piece. It lands near Ben's piece. 
For a minute, nothing happens. The pieces of bread float on the quiet water. 
Then, they hear a sound from the other side of the pond. 
"Quack, quack, quack."

"Look!" Ben points across the water. 
Three ducks are swimming towards them. They are moving very fast. Two of the ducks are brown. The third duck is very beautiful. It has a bright green head and a grey body. 
"That one with the green head is a male duck," their father explains. "The brown ones are female ducks."

The ducks swim directly to the pieces of bread. They dip their heads under the water and eat the bread quickly. 
"Quack, quack," the male duck says. He looks at Ben and Mia, waiting for more food. 
"He is hungry!" Mia laughs. She throws three more small pieces of bread into the water. 
The brown ducks swim quickly to get the bread. They use their flat yellow beaks to catch it. 

Suddenly, more ducks appear. They come out from the tall grass. Some ducks fly down from the trees and land on the water with a loud splash. 
Soon, there are ten ducks swimming in front of them. 
"Quack! Quack! Quack!" The noise is very loud now. The ducks are excited about the food. 

Ben and Mia throw more and more bread into the pond. They try to give some bread to the ducks at the back, but the big green-headed duck is very fast. He eats a lot of the bread. 
"Share with your friends, Mr. Green Head!" Ben says to the duck. 
The duck just quacks and eats another piece. 

"Look at that small one," Mia says. She points to a very small brown duck. It is staying at the edge of the group. The bigger ducks are pushing it away. 
"He cannot get any food," Mia says sadly. 
"Try to throw the bread very close to him," her father suggests. 

Mia takes a piece of bread. She aims carefully. She throws it gently. It lands in the water right next to the small brown duck. The small duck quickly eats the bread before the big ducks can steal it. 
"Good throw, Mia," Ben says. 
Mia smiles proudly. She throws two more pieces to the small duck. 

They stay at the pond for twenty minutes. They watch the ducks swim, eat, and clean their feathers. The ducks dive under the water and pop back up again. 
Finally, the plastic bag is empty. 
"That is all the bread," their father says. He shakes the empty bag to show the ducks. 
The ducks look at the empty bag. They realize there is no more food. Slowly, they turn around and swim away, back to the tall grass on the other side of the pond. 

"Goodbye, ducks!" Mia shouts. 
"They had a very good lunch today," Ben says. 
They walk away from the pond. Ben and Mia have no bread left, but they have a very good memory of the noisy, hungry, funny ducks at the park.








