Title: The First Good Mark
Category: Beginner

It is Friday afternoon. Jack is walking home from school. Usually, Jack walks slowly because his bag is heavy. But today, he is walking very fast. He is almost running. He has a big smile on his face, and he is holding a piece of paper tightly in his hand. 

Jack is ten years old, and he does not like spelling tests. English spelling is very difficult for him. Sometimes, words have silent letters. Sometimes, words do not sound the way they look. Because of this, Jack often gets bad marks on his spelling tests. He gets five out of ten, or sometimes four out of ten. 

But this week was different. On Monday, his teacher, Mrs. White, gave the class a new list of ten words. 
"You have a test on Friday," Mrs. White said. "You must study these words every night."
Jack decided to try very hard. He wanted a good mark. Every evening after dinner, he sat at his desk. He wrote the words ten times each. He covered the words and tried to spell them from memory. He asked his mother to test him. 
"How do you spell 'friend'?" his mother asked. 
"F-R-I-E-N-D," Jack answered. 
"Very good," she said. "And how do you spell 'because'?"
"B-E-C-A-U-S-E," Jack spelled carefully. 

He studied on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. 
Then, today was Friday. Mrs. White gave the class the test. She said the words slowly, and the students wrote them down. Jack felt nervous, but he remembered the letters. He wrote every word carefully. 

After the break, Mrs. White gave the test papers back. 
When Jack looked at his paper, he could not believe his eyes. There was a big red '10/10' at the top of the page. He got every word right! It was his first perfect mark in spelling. He was so happy that he wanted to shout. 

Now, he is walking home fast because he wants to show the paper to his mother. 
He reaches his house and opens the front door quickly. 
"Mother! Mother! Where are you?" Jack calls out. 
His mother comes out of the kitchen. She is wiping her hands on a towel. She looks worried because Jack is shouting. 
"I am here, Jack," she says. "What is wrong? Why are you shouting?"

"Nothing is wrong," Jack says happily. "Everything is great! Look at this!"
He runs to her and gives her the piece of paper. He is breathing fast from his quick walk. 
His mother takes the paper. She looks at it, and then she looks at Jack. A big, bright smile appears on her face. 
"Oh, Jack!" she says joyfully. "Ten out of ten! A perfect mark! I am so proud of you."

She gives him a big hug. Jack feels very warm and happy inside. 
"It was a difficult test," Jack says. "The word 'beautiful' is very hard to spell. But I remembered all the letters."
"That is because you worked very hard," his mother explains. "You studied every night this week. You practiced and practiced. Hard work always brings good results."
"Yes, it does," Jack agrees. "I did not want to watch television on Wednesday evening. I wanted to study my words. And I am glad I did."

"We must celebrate this," his mother says. She walks to the fridge. "Because you got your first perfect mark, we will have a special dessert tonight. We will have chocolate ice cream after dinner."
"Wow! Thank you, Mother," Jack says. He loves chocolate ice cream. 

"When your father comes home, you must show him the paper," she says. "He will be very happy too."
"I will," Jack promises. "I will put it on the kitchen table so he can see it immediately."
He takes the paper and puts it in the middle of the table. He smooths out the corners. It looks very good sitting there with the big red '10/10'. 

Jack goes to his bedroom to change his clothes. He takes off his school uniform and puts on his comfortable play clothes. He looks at his desk. His spelling notebook is still there. 
He realizes that studying is not a bad thing. It takes time, and it is sometimes boring, but the feeling of getting a good mark is wonderful. It feels much better than getting a bad mark. 

Next week, Mrs. White will give them ten new words. Jack knows what he will do. He will write them down. He will practice them every night. He will ask his mother to test him again. He wants to get another ten out of ten. He wants to feel this proud again. A good mark is a great reward for hard work.








