Title: A Winter Storm
Category: Beginner

It was a gloomy Thursday afternoon in January. The sky was the color of dark iron, and the temperature had dropped significantly since the morning. Inside their warm living room, Mr. and Mrs. Clark were watching the local news on television. Their teenage son, Mark, was sitting on the sofa, scrolling through his phone. 

"Listen to this, Mark," his father said, pointing the television remote at the screen. "The meteorologist is talking about the weather."
Mark looked up from his phone. On the screen, a weatherman was standing in front of a map that was covered in dark blue and purple colors. 

"We are expecting a major winter storm to hit our area tonight," the weatherman announced seriously. "A heavy blizzard is moving in from the north. We predict at least thirty centimeters of snow by tomorrow morning, accompanied by strong, freezing winds. Please stay off the roads unless it is an absolute emergency. It is going to be very dangerous outside."

Mrs. Clark frowned. She did not like winter storms. "Thirty centimeters is a lot of snow," she said, looking out the living room window at the grey street. "I am glad I went to the supermarket yesterday. We have plenty of food in the cupboards."

"I think we need to prepare the house," Mr. Clark said, standing up. "If the wind is as strong as they say, tree branches might break and fall on the power lines. We could easily lose our electricity tonight."

"Lose our electricity?" Mark repeated, suddenly looking worried. "But what about the internet? I need the internet to finish my history essay for school tomorrow."
"If the power goes out, the internet will go out too," his father replied practically. "I strongly suggest you finish that essay right now, Mark. Don't leave it until after dinner."

Mark sighed. He didn't want to do his homework now, but he knew his father was right. It was better to be safe. He put his phone in his pocket, grabbed his laptop, and walked upstairs to his bedroom. 

Downstairs, his parents started to prepare for the approaching blizzard. Mr. Clark went into the garage. He checked that the large red snow shovel was near the door. He also found a large bag of rock salt, which they would need to melt the ice on the front steps tomorrow. 

Mrs. Clark was busy in the kitchen. She took three heavy, metal flashlights out of a drawer and checked their batteries. She turned them on one by one. Two of them shone with a bright white light, but the third one was very dim. 
"We need new batteries for the small flashlight," she called out to her husband. 

Mr. Clark came back inside and found a packet of batteries in the hallway closet. He quickly replaced the old batteries, and the third flashlight shone brightly. 
"Good," Mrs. Clark said, placing the flashlights on the kitchen counter so they would be easy to find in the dark. "I also brought down the box of thick candles from the attic. We are ready."

Outside, the wind began to howl. It sounded like a wild animal crying around the corners of the house. The first few flakes of snow began to fall. They were small and hard, hitting the glass window with a sharp 'tick, tick, tick' sound. 

Mark came back downstairs two hours later. He looked relieved. 
"I finished my essay," he announced, closing his laptop. "I emailed it to my teacher just in case the school is closed tomorrow."
"That was a very smart decision," his mother praised him. "I think the school will definitely be closed. Look outside."

Mark walked to the window. In just two hours, the world had completely changed. The dark grey street was now completely white. The snow was falling so fast and thick that he could barely see the houses across the street. The wind was blowing the snow sideways, creating large, curving drifts against the fences. 

"It looks beautiful," Mark said quietly. 
"It is beautiful from inside a warm house," his father agreed, turning up the thermostat on the wall. "But it is a dangerous beast outside. I am very glad we are all safely at home tonight."
The family sat down in the living room together, listening to the roaring wind and watching the heavy white snow bury their town.








