Title: Buying Pet Supplies
Category: Beginner

While Barnaby rested safely in the meet-and-greet room at the shelter, the Clark family quickly drove to the large pet superstore down the street. They had a lot to buy, and they needed to do it quickly before the shelter closed for the evening. 

"Okay, team, we need to be organized," Mr. Clark said as they grabbed a large metal shopping cart at the entrance. "Leo and Maya, you are in charge of finding a collar and a strong leash. Your mother and I will find the food and the bowls. Meet us in aisle five in ten minutes."

Leo and Maya ran to the accessories aisle. The wall was covered in hundreds of different collars and leashes. There were leather collars, nylon collars, studded collars, and collars with reflective stripes for walking at night. 
"What color should we get?" Maya asked, looking at the overwhelming selection. 
"Barnaby has light brown fur," Leo considered. "I think a dark blue collar would look very handsome on him."

They found a sturdy dark blue collar that was adjustable. Then, they looked for a matching leash. 
"We shouldn't get one of those long, retractable leashes," Leo said responsibly. "The shelter worker said he needs obedience training. A shorter, strong nylon leash will give us better control when we walk him."
Maya agreed. They picked out a thick, two-meter-long blue leash and dropped it into their basket. 

They walked to aisle five to find their parents. Mr. Clark was struggling to lift a massive, heavy bag of dry dog food into the shopping cart. 
"Fifteen kilograms," he grunted, dropping the bag into the cart with a loud thud. "The worker at the shelter told us this is the exact brand he is currently eating. We don't want to change his diet suddenly, or he might get an upset stomach."

Mrs. Clark had selected two heavy, stainless steel bowls. 
"One for food and one for water," she explained. "Stainless steel is better than plastic because it doesn't break and it is very easy to clean."

"Do we have everything?" Leo asked, looking at the items in the cart. 
"Not quite," his mother replied. "He needs a place to sleep. We must buy a dog bed."
They walked to the back of the store, where dozens of soft beds were stacked on high shelves. Some beds looked like small couches, and others looked like giant fluffy pillows. 

"He is a medium-sized dog now, but he might grow a little more," Mr. Clark observed. "We should buy a large bed so he has plenty of room to stretch out."
Maya found a large, rectangular bed covered in soft, dark grey fleece. It felt very thick and comfortable. "I think he will love sleeping on this," she said. 

"Alright, that is the essentials sorted," Mr. Clark said, turning the cart towards the cash registers. 
"Wait!" Leo protested. "What about toys? We cannot take him home without any toys to play with. He liked that red rubber ball at the shelter."

His father smiled. "You are absolutely right. Go and pick two toys, but hurry up."
Leo and Maya ran back to the toy aisle. They quickly grabbed a strong, thick rope toy for playing tug-of-war, and a bright yellow tennis ball that squeaked when you squeezed it. 

They rejoined their parents at the checkout line. The cashier scanned the heavy bag of food, the steel bowls, the blue collar, the strong leash, the grey bed, and the two toys. The total price was quite high, but the family did not mind. 

"We are officially ready to be dog owners," Mr. Clark said, paying with his credit card. 
They loaded all the bulky supplies into the trunk of their car and drove back to the animal shelter. The paperwork was waiting for them to sign. They had everything they needed to keep Barnaby comfortable, safe, and happy. It was finally time to bring their new best friend home.








