Title: Buying the Decorations
Category: Beginner

It was Thursday evening. All five of Mia's friends had RSVP'd 'yes' to her secret mission invitation. They were all incredibly excited about the escape room. Now, Mia and her mother were driving to the large party supply store on the edge of town. They needed to buy decorations for the second half of the party, which would take place at their house. 

"We don't need a lot of things," Mia's mother said as she parked the car. "Just a few balloons and some banners to make the dining room look festive."
"I know, but I want it to look nice," Mia replied, unbuckling her seatbelt. 

They walked into the massive store. It was filled from floor to ceiling with bright colors. There were aisles of paper plates, plastic cups, fake flowers, and funny costumes. 
Mia walked straight to the balloon section. There were hundreds of balloons in every color imaginable. There were shiny metallic balloons, large balloons shaped like numbers, and balloons with messages written on them. 

"What color scheme should we choose?" her mother asked, looking at a bag of bright pink balloons. 
Mia frowned. "Pink is okay, but I think I am a bit too old for bright pink now. I want something a little more elegant for my fifteenth birthday."
She looked up and down the aisle. She thought about her favorite colors. 
"I think we should do silver and dark blue," Mia decided confidently. "It looks sophisticated, and it kind of matches the 'secret agent' theme of the invitations."

"Silver and dark blue is a wonderful combination," her mother agreed, putting the pink balloons back on the shelf. "Very mature. Let's find them."
They found a packet of deep blue balloons and a packet of shiny silver ones. 
"We should also get the big foil balloons in the shape of numbers," Mia suggested. "A one and a five."
They found a large, silver number '1' and a matching number '5'. The store assistant offered to fill them with helium gas so they would float, which Mia thought was a great idea. 

Next, they walked to the table decorations aisle. 
"We need a tablecloth," her mother said, picking up a cheap plastic one. "This blue one will protect the wooden table from pizza grease."
"And we need a 'Happy Birthday' banner to hang on the wall behind the table," Mia added. 

They searched through a box of banners. Many of them had cartoon characters or childish writing on them. Finally, Mia found a simple, elegant banner with silver letters on a dark blue background. It was perfect. 

"Do we need paper plates and plastic cups?" her mother asked. 
"No, I don't think so," Mia expressed her opinion clearly. "Using real plates and glasses is better for the environment. We can just wash them in the dishwasher after the party. It is less wasteful."
"That is very responsible of you, Mia," her mother smiled warmly. "I completely agree. We will use the nice white plates from the kitchen."

As they walked towards the cash register, Mia saw something that made her stop. It was a box of small, cheap magnifying glasses, the kind detectives use in old movies. 
"Look at these!" Mia laughed, picking up the box. "They are perfect for the escape room theme. Can we buy them? I can put one on every plate as a small party favor for my friends."
Her mother checked the price on the box. "They are very cheap. Yes, we can get them. Your friends will love that small detail."

They paid for the balloons, the banner, the tablecloth, and the magnifying glasses. The cashier handed Mia the strings attached to the two large helium balloons. The silver '15' floated high above her head as they walked back to the car. 

"Well, that was a very successful shopping trip," her mother said as they loaded the bags into the trunk. "The decorations are sorted. Tomorrow is Friday, which means it is baking day. Have you decided what kind of cake you want?"
Mia did not even have to think about it. "Chocolate," she said instantly. "A huge, rich, dark chocolate cake with chocolate frosting."
Her mother laughed loudly. "I expected nothing less. We will need to buy a lot of cocoa powder on the way home!"








