Title: The School Project
Category: Beginner

It was Monday morning. The school bell rang loudly at eight-thirty. Eleven-year-old Emma sat at her desk in the front row of her classroom. She took her blue notebook and her favorite black pen out of her backpack. She was ready for the first lesson of the day. 

Her teacher, Mr. Harrison, walked into the classroom. He was carrying a tall stack of white paper. 
"Good morning, class," Mr. Harrison said cheerfully. 
"Good morning, Mr. Harrison," the twenty-five students answered together. 

Mr. Harrison put the stack of paper on his large wooden desk. 
"Today, we are starting a very important new project," he announced. "For the next two weeks, we are not going to read from our normal science textbooks. Instead, you are going to do your own research."

A murmur of excitement went through the classroom. Emma liked doing projects. They were usually more fun than just reading a textbook and answering questions. 
"What is the project about?" a boy named Leo asked from the back of the room. 

"The project is about history and science," Mr. Harrison explained. "I want you to learn about how things used to be millions of years ago, or how the universe works. But I do not want you to find your information on the internet."
Emma looked confused. "If we cannot use the internet, where do we find the information?" she asked. 

Mr. Harrison smiled broadly. "You have to go to the City Museum," he said. "The City Museum is full of amazing things. It has dinosaur bones, old Egyptian mummies, and even a large room all about outer space. Your homework for this week is to visit the museum with your parents. You must choose one topic, learn everything you can about it, and then write a long report."

Mr. Harrison walked around the classroom and gave one piece of white paper to every student. 
Emma looked at her paper. It was a list of rules for the project. 
Rule number one: Choose a partner. 
Rule number two: Visit the museum and take notes. 
Rule number three: Write a three-page report together. 

Emma immediately looked across the aisle at her best friend, Sarah. Sarah looked back at Emma and nodded. They always worked together on school projects. They were a great team. Emma was very good at writing neatly, and Sarah was very good at drawing pictures to go with the text. 

"Okay, Sarah," Emma whispered. "We are partners. But what topic should we choose?"
"I don't know," Sarah whispered back. "I like space, but I also think dinosaurs are very cool."
"Let's wait until we get to the museum," Emma suggested. "We can look at everything and then decide."

When the school day finished at three o'clock, Emma ran all the way home. She burst through the front door. 
"Mom! Dad!" she called out. "I have a special homework assignment!"
Her mother came out of the kitchen, wiping her hands on a towel. "A special assignment? What is it?"
"I have to go to the City Museum," Emma explained excitedly. "Sarah and I have to do a big project. Can we go this weekend? Please?"

Her mother laughed. "Of course we can go. I haven't been to the museum in years. I will call Sarah's mother tonight, and we can all go together on Saturday morning."

Emma was thrilled. She went up to her bedroom and opened her blue notebook. She wrote 'MUSEUM PROJECT' in big, bold letters on the first page. She felt very grown-up. She was going to be a real researcher. She was going to find real facts in a real museum, not just search on a computer screen. She spent the rest of the week dreaming about giant skeletons and shining stars, waiting impatiently for Saturday to arrive.








