Title: Helping in the Garden
Category: Beginner

After a large breakfast of eggs, bacon, and toast, the whole family felt full and energetic. The sun was shining brightly, even though the November air remained cold. 
Grandma stood up from the kitchen table and looked out the window at the large back garden. 

"The wind blew very hard last week," Grandma said. "There are dead leaves everywhere on the grass. And I really need to plant my winter bulbs before the ground freezes completely."
She turned to the family with a smile. "I have a lot of work to do outside today. Does anyone want to help me?"

"I will help you, Grandma!" Sophie said immediately. She loved helping her grandmother. 
"We can all help," Mr. Miller added. "Many hands make light work."
"Excellent," Grandma said. "Put on your old clothes, your warmest coats, and your boots. Gardening is dirty work, and we will get muddy."

Ten minutes later, they all met by the wooden shed at the end of the garden. Grandpa opened the shed door and handed out the tools. He gave Mr. Miller and Thomas large, wide rakes. He gave Mrs. Miller a pair of thick gardening gloves and some pruning shears. He gave Sophie a small hand trowel and a basket full of brown, ugly-looking objects. 

"What are these?" Sophie asked, looking into her basket. They looked like small, dirty onions. 
"Those are tulip bulbs," Grandma explained, pulling on her own thick gloves. "They do not look very pretty now. But if we bury them deep in the cold earth today, they will sleep all winter. Then, when spring comes and the ground gets warm, they will grow into beautiful, bright flowers."
"That is like magic," Sophie said, fascinated. 

"Thomas and your father will rake the leaves," Grandma directed. "Your mother will cut back the dead rose bushes. And you, Sophie, will help me plant these bulbs along the edge of the path."
Everyone went to their stations and started to work. 

Thomas held his long wooden rake. He dragged the metal teeth across the green grass. The rake gathered the dry, brown leaves into a small pile. 
"Scratch, scratch, scratch," the rake sounded against the ground. 
Thomas worked quickly. He made one small pile, then moved to the next section and made another pile. His father was working on the other side of the garden, doing the same thing. 

"When we have many small piles, we will put them all into the wheelbarrow," his father called out. 
Thomas nodded. The work was hard, and his arms began to feel tired, but he liked being outside. The cold air felt good on his face because the work made his body warm. 

Meanwhile, Sophie followed Grandma along the stone path. 
"Okay, Sophie," Grandma instructed. "Take your small trowel. Dig a hole here. It must be deep enough so the bulb can hide from the frost."
Sophie knelt on the cold, wet grass. She pushed the metal trowel into the dark brown earth. The ground was hard, but she pushed with all her strength and turned the soil over. She made a neat, deep hole. 

"Perfect," Grandma praised her. "Now, take one bulb from the basket. Make sure the pointy end is facing up towards the sky. Put it gently in the hole."
Sophie carefully placed the brown bulb into the dark hole, pointing the tip upwards. 
"Now, cover it with the soil and pat it down flat," Grandma said. 
Sophie used her hands to push the dirt back over the bulb, patting it firmly. Her gloves were covered in thick, sticky mud, but she did not mind at all. She felt very proud. She was a real gardener. 

They moved one step down the path and dug another hole. They worked together as a great team. Dig, place, cover. Dig, place, cover. Slowly, the basket of brown bulbs became empty. 

By lunchtime, the garden looked completely different. Mr. Miller and Thomas had cleared all the dead leaves from the grass. They piled them high in the corner for compost. Mrs. Miller had trimmed the rose bushes so they looked neat and tidy. And along the path, thirty tulip bulbs were safely buried, waiting for the spring sun. 

"We did a wonderful job," Grandma said, looking around the garden with satisfaction. She took off her muddy gloves. "The garden is ready for winter. Thank you all very much for your hard work."

"It was fun," Sophie said, looking at her dirty hands. 
"It was," Thomas agreed, leaning on his rake. 
"Well, hardworking gardeners deserve a reward," Grandpa announced, walking out of the back door. He was carrying a tray with steaming mugs. "I made hot chocolate with marshmallows for everyone."

They gathered near the wooden shed, taking off their dirty gloves. They held the warm mugs in their cold hands and drank the sweet, hot chocolate. Looking at the clean, tidy garden they had worked on together made the hot chocolate taste even better. They felt tired, dirty, and incredibly happy.








