Category: Editorial
Title: Summon tech to address judicial delays Part Two

Summon tech to address judicial delays

NLP-powered AI systems can be most effective with clear, structured judgments to ensure accurate topic classification and precedent matching, facilitating semantic searches and auditability. Two government's digital initiatives illustrate successful technology-driven national reforms. The first is the National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal, which offers a centralised digital system that overcomes jurisdictional constraints by allocating centrally filed cybercrime complaints to the appropriate agency.

The second is the Income Tax Faceless Assessment Scheme, which has revolutionised tax adjudication by removing direct interface between taxpayers and assessing officers. The system randomly allocates assessments across a distributed network of officers. The entire process - from communication to submissions and assessment - occurs on a digital platform, increasing transparency, fairness, and efficiency.

Accordingly, a central e-filing and case management portal could be designed with the following major objectives - hosting a repository of all Indian laws and judgments; allowing format-and prompt-based structured case filings with multilingual submission support, leveraging the Supreme Court Vidhik Anuvaad Software (SUVAS)?; rejecting cases that are not maintainable; and classifying cases as per relevant jurisdictional rules - assigning cases to the appropriate court/tribunal and notifying that court/tribunal registry; and finally, assigning and managing case numbers, timetables, electronic service of summons, and remote hearings. Further, a summary of the case of each party can be presented to the judge and the parties, which can form the base for each hearing. The summary will highlight points already decided in another judgment(s) that affects the case.

Additionally, oral arguments can be transcribed real-time and assessed against decided cases which affect them to cut short such cases (detailed oral hearings could, of course, be reserved for constitutional or similarly critical matters as may be permitted by the court). Draft orders could be prepared post-hearing to assist the bench, and electronic uploading of judgments and appeals can preserve judicial continuity and reduce paperwork. Incorporating these steps by embracing AI, India's judiciary can move towards accessible, efficient, and timely justice for all.

By Anand Desai The writer is managing partner, DSK Legal
