Category: Editorial
Title: Super El Nio A brewing climate shock Part Two

Super El Niño: A brewing climate shock

Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has also issued advisory confirming the predication of NOAA and the strong link between Pacific Ocean condition and India's June to September rainfall. It has suggested the weakening of monsoon this year, as 7 out of 10 El Nino years have registered poor monsoon. Besides the human health in the region will be impacted, the El Nino cycle has potential to disrupt the lives and livelihood of the people in the region.

Unpredictable disruptions are also expected in global travel. Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) may turn favorable in August, which may counter the impact of El Nino in second half of monsoon season. However, IOD is generally unpredictable, but the loss of snow covers in 2026 (January to March) in northern hemisphere may brighten the chances of southwest monsoon.

Historically El Nino brings lower GDP growth due to a contraction in agricultural output, affecting overall economy. The 2023-24 El Nino, which was not a super El Nino, had caused a drop of 6.1% in agriculture production of the country. Promoting drought resistant crops and sustainable farming practices as well as soil and water conservation measures are the basic mitigation measures suggested for farming communities.

IMD must continue to predict rainfall trends as well as issue of early warning. Keeping a check on the water levels of the reservoirs and managing it for urban water supply, irrigation and power projects will have to be monitored by central and state governments till Pacific attains a neutral condition and El Nino conditions vanish in later part of 2027. Some urban and rural areas may encounter drinking water problem, which has to be managed by agencies judiciously.

A cap on the rent of the water tankers may be imposed to ensure that water-tanker mafias are not allowed to take advantage of the situation and the population is not put further into the hardships. The rising temperature of the planet can lead to devastating wildfire in different regions. While the burning of forests of California, Boreal and Amazon forests can damage the global lung spaces by reducing the capacity of Carbon dioxide sequestration, the continued fire can disrupt the lives and livelihood of the communities' dependent on forest resources.

Strait of Hormuz is already a choke point, where 20% of oil and gas from GCC countries flows to the world market. A sizable proportion of fertilizer and helium also flow through this point. Many economies have taken a hit owing to the trade disruption at the strait. El Nino is predicted to create another choke point at Panama Canal.

El Nino events are associated with rainfall deficit in Central America, which may directly impact water levels in Gatun lake - a fresh water reservoir that powers the lock system of Panama Canal. During El Nino driven drought experienced in 2023-24, the transit of ships through it was slashed down to 24 vessels per day. It also faced a shipping draft restriction of 44 feet, permitting vessels navigating shallower ports.

These vessels transported reduced cargo due to fallen water level in Gatun Lake. The prolonged disruption had ripple effect in global supply chains, driving congestion, higher transit cost and several re-routing of the cargo vessels. However, a shift to La Nina and a sustained rainfall restored water level in Gatun reservoir and the Canal could transport nearly 36 vessels with full 50 feet draft.
