Category: Editorial
Title: Super El Nio A brewing climate shock Part One

Super El Niño: A brewing climate shock

There is a high probability of El Niño forming later this year. With global temperatures already near record highs, this evolving pattern could disrupt monsoons, strain agriculture, and trigger extreme weather worldwide - placing economies on edge. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) on April 9, has predicted that there is 61% chance that El Nino will be formed in late summer and fall towards the end of this year and there is 33% chance that it would be a strong one, typically known as "Super El Nino".

There have been only 5 such El Nino have been registered since 1950 and the last one was formed in 2015-16. The Copernicus Climate Change Service has also confirmed that 2026 March has registered second highest Sea Surface temperature, which points towards the possibility of El Nino conditions forming later inn summer this year. April 9, advisory of NOAA has confirmed that an eventful La Nina winter, when powerful storms have disrupted the lives of the people on American and European continents, is concluded and Pacific Ocean has shifted into a neutral pattern such that Sea surface temperature in central and east-central tropical Pacific has become average.

La Nina, neutral and El Nino are three phases of El-Nino southern oscillation (ENSO) cycle formed on account of natural changes in Pacific Ocean temperature and atmospheric circulation. El Nino typically means less activity in Atlantic basin and more activity in central and eastern equatorial Pacific. During El Nino cycle more tropical cyclones is experienced in Pacific and lower than the average in Atlantic.

A super El Nino acts as a shield bringing higher pressure and vertical wind shear that suppresses hurricane formation in Atlantic. The weather pattern in this cycle in the equatorial Pacific region experiences droughts, floods, extreme heat, hurricanes and declining Sea ice. The sea surface temperature rises by more than 2 degrees Celsius, resulting in hotter than average summer in Western United States, parts of Africa, Europe and India.

Further, the tropical countries like Caribbean islands and Indonesia may experience severe drought and extreme heat. The atmosphere is likely to trap more greenhouse gases and increase the concentration of carbon dioxide and 2027 is set to register record rise in average global temperature. So far 2024 has been the warmest, and now 2027 is likely to breach this.

The experts have also forecasted that the super El Nino of 2026-27 is likely to disperse more heat than what three earlier super El Nino events in 1982-83, 1997-98 and 2015-16 have dispersed. The unusual heat and humidity may intensify the flow of atmospheric moisture. As the warmer atmosphere has huge amount of moisture carrying capacity, it will bring excessive rains and flash floods in the region.

Also the heat released in super El Nino event remains trapped in the atmosphere due to increasing concentration of greenhouse gases, and thus every cycle of El Nino stair-steps the global rise in temperature. The above average summer temperature and humidity may bring downpours in hills and a thunderstorm season in the plains of Western United States. Along with Central Africa, Australia, Indonesia, Philippines, central America, Brazil and south Pacific islands, the central and northern part of India is likely to have monsoon suppressed causing a severe impact on agriculture production.
