Category: Editorial
Title: Supreme Court has nurtured environmental law Part Two

Supreme Court has nurtured environmental law. Is it distancing itself from its legacy?

Sustainable development has come to be accepted as a part of customary international law. In the case of M.C. Mehta vs Kamal Nath, famously known as the Span Motel case, the Supreme Court developed the concept of the public trust doctrine. While Span Motel had to bear the cost of compensation and had to face penalties under the polluter pays principle, it was the Himachal Pradesh government which was pulled up for breaching public trust.

The Supreme Court also emphasised the principle of inter-generational equity, holding that the present generation has a duty to protect the environment for future generations. From these judgments, and there are many more, we can conclude that if Indian environmental jurisprudence has a parent, it is the Supreme Court. It has nurtured environmental law from its infancy.

But having said that, I ask myself: Today, do these decisions look very distant? My former colleague in the Bombay High Court, Justice Gautam Patel, has analysed Supreme Court judgments dealing with the environment in an article titled 'Consistently Inconsistent: Environmental Law and the Supreme Court'. Justice Patel finds that by and large, the Supreme Court has supported the environmental cause raised by non-governmental organisations.

It has not shown the same degree of support to cases challenging infrastructure projects. Justice Patel says it is in precisely this area that an intervention of the Supreme Court is vital, and yet it is here that we find a reluctance to come down on the side of the environmentalists. He says the jurisprudential inconsistency is apparent when one sets these decisions against the principles that the Supreme Court itself repeatedly enunciates in the broadest possible terms.

It is that consistent inconsistency that exacerbates the threats to the environment. Is there any conflict between environment and development? The answer, according to me, is an emphatic no. Three decades ago, the Supreme Court had observed in the Vellore Citizens case that the traditional concept that development and ecology are opposed to each other is no longer acceptable.

In my Vanashakti review judgment, I have said that it is unfortunate that a false narrative is being created pitting environment against development. Both are part of the constitutional construct of sustainable development. When a conscientious citizen approaches the Court with a grievance that a particular project is in breach of environmental norms, what should be the approach of the court?

Should the Court throw out the challenge at the threshold by asking aloud, almost posing a leading question to itself, whether any development project in India has gone unchallenged? It is true that there are many busybodies who file frivolous petitions. However, such attempts have been deprecated by the courts, but that cannot be the reason to paint all challengers with the same brush.

There are committed environmentalists in our country who continue to espouse the cause of the environment. Where would they go if the doors of the courts are closed? According to me, that cannot be the approach of a constitutional court. Instead, the Court should ask: Has the project complied with the environmental norms?

The Court should assure itself and citizens that all projects, big or small, infrastructure or otherwise, should comply with the environmental norms. Written by: Ujjal Bhuyan The writer is a Supreme Court Justice. Edited excerpts from a speech he delivered on August 8 at Vivekananda Kendra, Guwahati
