Category: Editorial
Title: Tax breakthrough

Tax breakthrough

OECD progress on global minimum tax, welcome The agreement reached by 147 countries and jurisdictions under the OECD/G20 inclusive framework to implement the global minimum tax, despite the challenges posed by the Trump administration, is quite an achievement. In January 2025, Trump had not only declared that the global minimum tax would have no force or effect for the US, but had also threatened revenge tax on countries imposing the same on US multinational companies. Although the agreement exempts US MNCs, the adoption of the global minimum tax of 15 per cent is a good first step which will check profit shifting by large MNCs to low tax jurisdictions.

India, as well as other signatories stand to benefit from this. The OECD agreement signed in October 2021 under the Biden administration had agreed on two tax pillars to ensure that large MNCs paid tax in the jurisdictions where the profit is derived from and to ensure that digital multinational entities did not evade tax citing lack of physical presence. The 'pillar two' of this agreement, which has been agreed upon now, applies global minimum tax on MNCs which earn revenues over €750 million.

It lays down that irrespective of the corporate tax structure in any country, MNCs shall pay at least the minimum tax in the countries they operate in. A top-up tax can be levied by tax authorities on these companies if their effective tax rate is below 15 per cent. The agreement ensures that the minimum tax is paid in all the countries where an MNC group operates.

If a subsidiary of an MNC group pays less than 15 per cent tax in a low tax jurisdiction, then the country where the parent entity of the group is situated can impose a top-up tax to bring the tax to 15 per cent. The idea is to remove the motivation for MNCs to look for innovative tax arrangements to bring down their tax liability. The exemption for American MNCs is, however, a setback.

Tech giants from the US such as Microsoft, Apple, Alphabet and Amazon will not be liable to pay the minimum tax in the jurisdictions they operate. MNCs all over the world are known to leverage low tax jurisdictions to bring down their tax incidence. India will, however, be able to impose the minimum tax on such companies from other jurisdictions such as Europe which operate here.

It will also usher in better transparency and will level the field between domestic companies and MNCs. India, along with other signatories of the OECD BEPS agreement should also continue to work towards implementing the 'pillar one' of the 2021 agreement. This says that with respect to MNCs with a global revenue of €20 billion and pre-tax profit of over 10 per cent, 25 per cent of the profit above this 10 per cent threshold will be allocated to the countries where this revenue is earned.

This could give India a chance to tax tech giants. It had abolished the equalisation levy of 6 per cent on revenues earned on online advertisements. The dilution of 'pillar two' can perhaps be made up to an extent.
