Category: Editorial
Title: Taxing frivolous industries will not fund Part Two

Taxing 'frivolous' industries will not fund India's science

Should the money go towards buying more microscopes, gene sequencers, or chromatography equipment? Most scientists would, credulously, want these decisions to be left to scientists themselves: a grand delusion, for no subsidy is ever unconditional. A government that provides a fertilizer subsidy will ensure that it is used only to purchase fertilizers, and will go to extreme lengths to define what a fertilizer is.

The subsidy giver has historically viewed the subsidy recipient as a potential embezzler. State funding for science is no different. What is 'allowed' instead of 'needed' Government funding for science is, by definition, categorised into watertight compartments, for example, electronics, chemical reagents, consumables, travel grants, and equipment.

Laboratories that do not need that extra bottle of hydrogen chloride but desperately need a computer monitor are often unable to make the purchase because the money has been rigidly earmarked. Once, a laboratory was allowed to purchase a server under "electronics", but not a graphics card because, for some inexplicable reason, it fell under "consumables" rather than "electronics". If a scientist does not spend all the money allocated to her in a financial year, she may receive less funding in the next one.

This absurd incentive produces colossal wastage, as what is "allowed" is bought instead of what is "needed", often at the cheapest possible price. Consequently, precious time is wasted learning tricks to circumvent these restrictions, much like companies did during the Licence Raj. Experiments are often put on hold while scientists navigate cumbersome procurement rules, particularly towards the end of each financial year.

Steps to take Theoretically, the money is there, but it is squandered because its expenditure is predetermined by archaic rules that the bureaucracy has little incentive to change. Removing these restrictions would free up considerable resources for their intended use. Procurement aside, even the recruitment of scientists is governed by the archaic University Grants Commission Act (1956), contributing to India losing some of its best scientists to opportunities overseas.

Another indirect and "less bad" measure for expanding available funds would be to remove the Goods and Services Tax and steep import duties on scientific equipment. The rent on knowledge creation slows research and stagnates the circulation of money, which ultimately returns to the government. Right now, India also places crippling restrictions on private investment in science.

Strict compliance requirements under CSR rules incentivise short-term, low-risk research projects. Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act procedures remain tedious, and many laboratories struggle to navigate the paperwork required to attract foreign funding. This is unfortunate, as private endowments have a greater stake in the success of research than any anonymous bureaucrat ever would.

In a bid to promote domestic manufacturing, the government has resorted to import substitution, a measure that serves only to insulate local industries from global competition while failing to deliver world-class products. The mandatory adoption of the Government e-Marketplace (GeM) has been a death knell, further delaying procurement and forcing scientists to settle for cheaply made Indian equipment that looks identical on paper but falls short of international standards. Often, they spend time identifying "features" available only in foreign-made products so that they can be allowed to purchase them.
