Category: Editorial
Title: Taxing frivolous industries will not fund Part One

Taxing 'frivolous' industries will not fund India's science

Will not fund India's science The way forward is to liberalise the channels through which money and capital flow into academia and reduce dependence on the government Whenever concerns are raised about the lack of funding for Indian science, a solution often put forward is to tax "unintellectual" industries such as cinema, tourism, apparel, and perfumes. For example, only recently, an academic from one of India's leading research institutes suggested taxing the Indian Premier League (IPL), which, he argued, would magically generate "₹15 billion" for scientific pursuits; the "stroke of genius" was duly fawned over. This reflects a common instinct: it is naturally hard not to want a share of the cake for a 'nobler' cause, when a 'frivolous' business makes profit in plain view.

A flawed proposition It is equally easy to overlook the economic cascade effects of such frivolities. Organised sport, for example, generates employment across a multitude of allied industries: merchandise, food and beverage, broadcasting, physiotherapy and rehabilitation (sports science is a science too). This investment has undeniable trickle-down benefits, across more sports than one and beyond major cities.

Though well-intentioned, the myopic and fallacious "tax-this-to-fund-that" proposition needs to be dispelled immediately. If 'profit' in the sports or film industries necessarily came at the expense of science, then the exercise in financial imputation should be very simple: of the $5 billion in profit earned by a match or a movie, $1 billion was made because a laboratory fell short of centrifuges. If that were true, then all scientists should refrain from watching movies or sports on government-subsidised campus Wi-Fi, as this would imply scientific funding flowing back to the entertainment industry.

Luckily for them, the empirical evidence does not hold up: countries boasting a high expenditure on sport do not necessarily have poor scientific output, and vice versa. Besides, science is not an isolated pursuit: significant scientific input goes into making films or manufacturing textiles. The disastrous economic experiments in India and around the world in the 20th century demonstrated that wealth is not a fixed, zero-sum pie: progress in X does not necessarily come at the expense of Y.

As academics, we must refrain from making sweeping moralistic remarks, as though we know the right level of wealth surplus and how it should be spent better than the market does. Millions of dispersed individual decisions made by ordinary people contain more information than centralised academic or bureaucratic intelligence. Moreover, how do we know that the state can reliably direct the proceeds towards science?

Government spending is the prerogative of bureaucrats and politicians, who are inevitably insulated from the consequences of such expenditure. Should the money be directed towards science, must it be distributed equally among all institutes and laboratories across the country, or apportioned according to productivity? If the latter, how will productivity be measured, and by whom?

Some scientists appointed as advisers to the Department of Science and Technology? Would they not favour their colleagues and collaborators? But, why only science? Just as scientists can make a fair claim for the setting up of state-of-the-art research laboratories, surgeons could demand better hospitals in Tier-3 towns, and policemen could call for better protective gear.

Given the same pool of government money, how does one choose among these equally valid, competing claims? Politicians are notorious for basing such decisions on the electoral strength of each group, while academics form factions among themselves: microbiologists might grumble about theoretical physicists receiving disproportionately high funding, much to the delight of funding agencies. If 'only science', then what kind of science?
