Category: Editorial
Title: Technological empowerment of Women The way Part One

Technological empowerment of Women: The way forward for climate resilience

Women: The way forward for climate resilience The Himalayan region, with its breathtaking landscapes and ecological sensitivity, is also a volatile and temperamental ecosystem. Rapidly changing global climate is impacting this geologically young region even more. Ridden with flash floods, glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs), landslides, cloudbursts, glacial retreat, and earthquakes, this "water tower of the world" shows the profound impacts of the Anthropocene.

The signs are clear as we witness an increase in forest fires, pre-season flowering, drying water resources, rising average temperatures, and the growing unpredictability of traditional farming seasons. Amidst this unfolding crisis, a quiet revolution is taking place in the Himalayan ranges. Once again, it is led by women, but empowered by technology and grounded in local wisdom.

Women, the backbone of society for ages, have long been the harbingers of the socio-cultural fabric of communities that are part of this fragile ecosystem. They have created systems in sync with nature to sustain their presence in otherwise precarious environments for millennia. As providers and resource managers, women have consistently navigated the changing weather and climatic patterns of the Himalayas, braving extremes and enduring disasters.

From west to east, even as we observe cultural differences, there are stark similarities: women are farmers, forest gatherers, water managers, and caregivers. They manage their surroundings with the repository of generational knowledge within their communities, even before the advent of formal education systems. Although rapidly changing global conditions have made the Himalayas more fragile than many other vulnerable systems worldwide, women at the community level understand how to manage climate change and weather patterns.

However, the intensity of change and the impact of disasters now present challenges that may require more than traditional wisdom. Women in the Himalayas face unique challenges, including dwindling natural resources, habitat fragmentation, human-wildlife conflict, unpredictable weather events, and the decline of traditional knowledge. To create truly resilient societies in the face of such overwhelming changes, these bravewomen urgently need technological assistance.

The situation is pressing, and we must act swiftly. Western science has recognised that mountain women have traditionally practised climate-resilient agriculture, water conservation, and forest management. What has changed in recent years is the increased scarcity of natural resources, habitat fragmentation, human-wildlife conflict, unpredictable weather events, and the erosion of traditional knowledge.

As an avid traveller, I have often had the opportunity to interact with women in the remote regions of Uttarakhand. It is concerning to realise that there is not only a massive gap in understanding and applying traditional knowledge systems, which have been crucial for community survival for generations, but also a lack of affordable and accessible technology. Today, mobile phones are multifunctional devices capable of taking GPS locations, mapping, and providing early warning updates.

These handheld devices are becoming increasingly reliable and robust. Many self-help groups that recognise the power of technology have already begun blending traditional knowledge with these innovations, creating safer and more resilient environments. It is awe-inspiring to see women assimilating technology while preserving their traditional values, becoming better prepared for disasters, creating sustainable livelihoods, and monitoring the environment.
