Category: Editorial
Title: The limits of international branch campuses Part Two

The limits of international branch campuses

Will these branches provide full-time faculty from their home campuses? Experience shows that this is seldom the case. As a result, these campuses have to rely primarily on local faculty. If that is the case, what then will distinguish these branch campuses from India's emerging elite and semi-elite universities?

Also, will the branches have a research mission? The vast majority of branch campuses worldwide are only teaching outposts, as building research capacity is expensive. Indeed, research has been a point of contention between the Chinese government and a number of the branch campuses in China  - including British branches of Nottingham in Ningbo and Liverpool in Suzhou.

In India, the question is whether the branch campuses will be allowed to engage with the national research ecosystem by participating in the schemes of the Indian Council of Social Science Research or Department of Science and Technology or remain isolated teaching units. Their contribution to India's research output and innovation metrics would be meaningful only if they are incentivised to undertake research collaborations and capacity-building. Balancing ambition and reality The ultimate value of foreign branch campuses will depend less on their brand and more on their ability to offer something not readily available in India.

If handled well, branch campuses can provide access for students as India expands higher education enrolments. They can provide useful examples of innovative government and management practices that may be relevant for India's often sclerotic higher education system. However, the absence of clear frameworks on accreditation and quality assurance leaves uncertainty about how such collaborations will align with national standards and protect student interests.

The question of fee structures adds another layer of complexity because India's many semi-elite and elite private universities already offer globally benchmarked programmes with international partnerships. As India approaches an era of branch campuses, there are significant possibilities, but caveat emptor. Philip G.

Altbach, Professor Emeritus and Distinguished Fellow, Center for International Higher Education, Boston College, U.S.; Eldho Mathews, Programme Officer (internationalisation) at the Kerala State Higher Education Council
