Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part Extra Third

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

To be sure, there have been false alarms on El Nino in recent years. El Nino events can also vary in severity and not all of them adversely impact India's agricultural output. Offsetting factors such as the Indian Ocean Dipole can blunt its impact on the monsoon. Nevertheless, it is hard to ignore that 10 of the 15 drought years in India since 1950, were brought on by El Nino.

Moderate to strong El Nino years saw rainfall fall short of LPA (Long-Period Average) by 14- 15 per cent. This led to a 1-2 percentage point contraction in the agriculture leg of GVA (Gross Value Added) in those years. Recent official estimates peg the growth in Agriculture GVA at just 2.4 per cent for FY26.

A second consecutive year of poor growth can dent rural employment and incomes. Moderate/strong El Nino years have also sparked food inflation, due to kharif output declining by between 6 and 12 per cent. This is a worry, as RBI's forecasts already expect consumer price inflation to rise to 4 and 4.2 per cent in the first two quarters of FY27, without budgeting for El Nino.

In recent years, the government has attempted to address food shortages and inflationary trends set off by El Nino through post-facto interventions. It has undertaken releases of foodgrain stocks from Central buffers, banned exports and opened the floodgates of imports on agri-commodities in short supply. But such interventions carry a price.

Ad-hoc export bans and import duty cuts hit realisations for farmers, who are already engaged in a risky occupation. This makes it critical to get a hold on the strength and timing of the upcoming El Nino ahead of the kharif sowing season. This will enable proactive policy choices on trade, sowing decisions and water conservation.

It is important that the India Meteorological Department (IMD) makes a realistic assessment of the likelihood and severity of El Nino in its April monsoon forecast. Experience shows that it tends to underplay the El Nino impact. In the El Nino years 2018 and 2023, IMD forecasted normal monsoons with rainfall at 97 and 96 per cent of LPA.

However, actual monsoon performance turned out much worse, with rainfall at 91 and 94 per cent of LPA. More accuracy is called for here. Can US afford Trump's Iran war? It will considerably dent the US budget at a time when the country's public finances are unsustainable Until recently, one of the MAGA movement's most deeply held convictions was that American blood and treasure should not be expended abroad when Americans  -  and the American Dream  -  are suffering at home.

Yet now the movement's leader, President Donald Trump, has rushed headlong into a costly war against Iran. The US-Israeli campaign against the Islamic Republic is bound to put a considerable dent in the US budget at a time when the country's public finances already are on an unsustainable path. It is also bound to continue pushing up international oil and gas prices at a time when the US already has an affordability problem.
