Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part Two

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

Office administrators can organise workshops with experts so that women can understand their bodies better and understand the importance of cancer screenings and chronic illnesses. Menstrual leave, on the other hand, would automatically disqualify women's potential to be a valued resource. In countries that have made menstrual leave an official policy, results have been mixed.

Spain, which became the first European country to offer a five-day paid leave in 2023, has seen low usage. In Japan, only 0.9 per cent of workers use it. In South Korea, the unpaid nature of leave has disabled participation. And in Zambia, the policy has been "abused" by some workers as an extra holiday, causing debate among employers.

Closer home in Karnataka, which introduced a paid period leave a month, compliance has been mixed. This is likely because many women still feel uncomfortable taking the leave, fearing it could fuel workplace discrimination. And they don't want to be marginalised further. Besides, while we talk about paid leaves in offices, the fact of the matter is that such rules cannot apply in the unorganised sector, where every single day's wage matters.

At a time when women's participation in the workforce is dipping, no woman labourer wants to pass up a day. In the end, menstrual leaves may seem groundbreaking to policymakers because they become another sop in their social welfare efforts. But for women, they can prove to be gendered and disempowering, risking the reinforcement of the very biases they claim to remedy.

Written by: Rinku Ghosh The writer is senior associate editor, The Indian Express. Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes The state must not evade responsibility when it pushes for vaccination The Supreme Court of India's directive in Rachana Gangu to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to design a no-fault compensation scheme for serious adverse events following immunisation (AEFI) arising from India's COVID-19 vaccination campaign marks a shift from a fault-based liability system to a no-fault one in state-run public health programmes. The case arose from writ petitions filed in various courts by families claiming that their relatives had died or suffered serious injury after receiving COVID-19 vaccines.

Rachana Gangu was over the deaths, in 2021, of two women aged 18 and 20, allegedly from vaccine-induced immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia (VITT), a rare complication of the Covishield vaccine. Affected families contended that India had no dedicated mechanism to compensate those harmed in a state-run programme. For several years, the government resisted establishing a compensation policy because it held that vaccination was voluntary, serious AEFI rates were extremely low, and aggrieved citizens could sue vaccine manufacturers in civil court  -  a position the Court has since rejected as being impractical for ordinary individuals.

The new ruling also builds on Jacob Puliyel (2022), in which the Court rejected challenges to emergency vaccine approvals but emphasised the need to make AEFI data publicly available. In 2024, a few years after scientists had established the same concern in medical literature, AstraZeneca acknowledged in a U.K. court document that Covishield could, in rare instances, cause VITT.

Since most Indians were vaccinated with Covishield, the admission further undermined the government's position that links between the vaccine and certain deaths were unproven or coincidental. Despite operating one of the world's largest immunisation efforts, India has historically lacked a dedicated national vaccine injury compensation programme. Many countries, including the U.S.
