Category: Editorial
Title: The enduring democratic message of a royal Part One

The enduring democratic message of a royal charter

King Charles III has done well to reiterate that the Magna Carta's 'law above rulers' theme must resonate across the democratic world "Magna ...what?" Most contemporary readers and viewers of news would, on hearing or reading that phrase, ask. But not those interested in history, the rule of law, the rights of citizens, the supremacy of ethics over politics in the running of governments. King Charles III of the United Kingdom in his speech on April 28, to the U.S.

Congress in Washington DC used the phrase to thunderous applause. He is very much into the history of his country. He has to be, as a successor of King John (c.1167-1216) who unveiled, or was forced to unveil the Magna Carta. 'John who?' could well be the next question. So lacking in luck was King John that no monarch in England has been given that name ever since.

There has been no King John II. But he is famous for having decreed and given, or made to decree and give, not just to his country and people, but to the world, the Magna Carta. The over 800-year-old royal charter of rights sealed by King John at Runnymede, near Windsor, on June 15, 1215 owes its name to Latin, the language of Homer and Cicero, in which the phrase means Great Charter.

Magna Carta has come to mean, for those interested in the evolution of the political rights of people, a metaphor for any text that inscribes such rights as inherent in people, rather than being concerted without checks in any individual or organ of state. Singularly unpopular for his whimsies, King John had to make peace with a group of rebel barons who demanded that the King sign himself out of arbitrary power and, most important of all, proclaim that he was subservient to law or what, in today's legal parlance would be called 'due process'. In referring to the Magna Carta, King Charles III was drawing attention to the limits of his own or any sovereign, including, in today's world, elected 'sovereigns'.

Small wonder that legislators in Washington DC greeted the reference with éclat. Subtle language craftsmanship Does King Charles write his own speeches? It is more than likely that for a state visit such as this to the U.S., the British monarch had his speeches drafted by the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office.

This, not just because they were to come from Britain's reigning King but because they were to be made in the world's most powerful nation currently at war, a war seen by the world as one that has been started by the personal decision of U.S. President Donald Trump. And that is where Britain's subtle ways with the language of William Shakespeare, Oscar Wilde and George Orwell came in handy.

As also its interiorisation of Latinisms and Latin concepts that have grown into English usage. The term Magna Carta was per se coined, according to Wikipedia, by 'scribes in the English Royal Chancery around 1215-1217'. Three clauses of the Magna Carta remain on Britain's statute, of which the following is most impressive: "No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any other wise destroyed; nor will we not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the land.
