Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part Extra

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

Greater clarity on the El Niño factor will of course become available when the IMD makes its first long-term forecast for the monsoon by April. But as they say, to be forewarned is to be forearmed. Contingency plans must be put in place if El Niño conditions develop this year that can affect the monsoon as indicated by agencies like the WMO.

Software at the speed of chat With the right scrutiny and security guardrails, underlying competitive advantage awaits capture What is vibe coding? It's artificial intelligence (AI) assisted programming, where those seeking to code describe their intention and creative direction in natural language, and AI tools do the rest. This includes figuring the architecture and project structure, generating code and doing the debugging, to create working software.

The term "vibe coding" was coined by AI researcher Andrej Karpathy, as AI acts as an active collaborator. Advanced versions use AI agents to collaborate more deeply - writing and running self-tests, or executing multi-file editing across the codebase, enabling rapid prototyping and quick deployment. The popular tools for vibe coding include Cursor (for professional developers who want an integrated development environment that combines various tools into a single graphical user interface), Replit Agent for beginners, Windsurf/Cline for agentic support, Google AI Studio which leverages Gemini, and the popular Claude Code from Anthropic.

Educational and other imperatives Considering the developments in making AI tools easier to use, one could argue that structured learning isn't essential. What's clearer is that mastery over all tools is a long shot, considering their abundance, and because that type of proficiency is transient. An education grounded in enduring principles is more durable.

Like conceptual data flows, precision in semantics, skills to audit code, and enduring clarity of thought. With AI handling all the grunt work, such a curriculum also signals the shift - from needing more entry level coders to more experienced orchestrators. Investors are beginning to value product visioning, the scale and depth of the problem being solved, and market timing, more than before.

An aside: It is advisable to be disciplined about vibe coding work hours, as developers transitioning from traditional coding to vibe coding reportedly experience a high - much like having acquired a superpower of sorts - and are inclined to work much longer hours, which could lead to burnout. Upsides and downsides To reiterate, entry barriers are collapsing, allowing non-technical founders to rapidly build functional software solutions at a fraction of the cost, signalling a shift away from the usual, jejune URL path. Simultaneously, as developers become orchestrators, the focus is shifting to system design and user experience.

Lean tech teams at nascent startups are now building products overnight, changing the economic equation substantially. While an AI agent creates code almost instantly, it usually lacks a global understanding of the system. Redundant libraries could be added. Over time, a vibe-coded solution could well become a black box where neither humans nor machine understand the interconnected dependencies.

When AI's context window can no longer decipher the code created, it could lead to a "vibe collapse". Sometimes, without a complete grasp of the business context, or because of prioritising getting the app to work, oversight pertaining to compliance or original security assumptions could also occur. Expert guidance could help preclude such hurdles.
