Category: Editorial
Title: The RBI policy trilemma Part One

The RBI policy trilemma

Deposit rates, lending rates & liquidity: RBI must manage without relying on a single policy instrument We are living through an unusually interesting phase in macroeconomic policy, where India and the global economy are sending sharply contrasting signals. Domestically, there have been three encouraging developments in quick succession. First, monetary and fiscal policies appear to be moving in a coordinated direction, with a clear objective of increasing foreign capital inflows and easing external sector pressure, and arresting excessive rupee depreciation with a comprehensive set of measures announced on last Friday.

Second, the revised GDP data has delivered a positive surprise, with Q4 FY26 growth at 7.8% and full-year FY26 growth at 7.7%  -  much higher than any market estimates. Third, the external sector has surprised positively, with India recording a current account surplus of 0.7% of GDP in Q4 FY26 owing to higher personal remittances. Remittances for deposits from abroad have grown by ~25% year-on-year.

These developments together suggest that India's macroeconomic fundamentals are much stronger and the economy is more resilient than what the recent pressure on the rupee may have implied. The policy measures announced to attract foreign currency inflows are particularly important in this context. The foreign currency non-resident (bank) or FCNR(B) window is expected to bring in around $40-45 billion of fresh foreign currency deposits into the banking system.

In addition, the external commercial borrowings/overseas foreign currency borrowings swap window could potentially bring in another $15-20 billion of dollar supply. These measures may result in total foreign currency inflows of around $55-65 billion. This is not a small intervention. At a time when emerging market currencies have been under pressure, a dollar inflow of this size can materially alter market expectations, improve foreign exchange liquidity, and reduce the perception of one-way pressure on the rupee.

The most direct implication of these measures will be on the rupee exchange rate. While it is always difficult to forecast a precise exchange rate level, the combination of stronger external sector data, renewed dollar inflows, and policy support should reduce depreciation pressure. Under reasonable assumptions, the rupee could gradually appreciate towards the 92-93 per dollar range.

The second major implication of the policy package will be felt in the banking sector. The expected $55-65 billion of capital inflows would translate into roughly at least Rs 4.5 lakh crore of additional deposit resources at current exchange rates. This will help banks at a time when credit growth has been significantly running ahead of deposit growth.

Deposit growth for FY27 could move towards the 15% range against the potential credit growth of around 16%. The credit deposit gap could narrow to less than 200 basis points (bps) against a peak of 670 bps in FY24 after adjusting for regulatory dispensations. This has important implications for the term structure of interest rates.

A large addition to deposit resources will eliminate the intensity of competition for domestic deposits and thus deposit rates might even witness a decline. In contrast, the RBI might face a policy dilemma of a tightening cycle amid rising inflation against the avalanche of liquidity. It may have to manage inflation expectations, currency stability, and liquidity conditions simultaneously without relying on a single policy instrument.

Intriguingly, any such policy tightening cycle is completely incongruent with a deposit rate cut/status quo cycle. With the monsoon onset being one of the weakest in history (a 26% cumulative shortfall till date), growth considerations might take centre stage. The IMD forecast of 90% rainfall is the lowest since 2001.
