Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part Extra Fourth

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

Neither outcome bodes well for US inflation and employment, with the outlook already grim following an unexpectedly negative monthly jobs report. Even before the start of the Iran war, Trump suggested that the US needed a substantial expansion of its defence budget, proposing to increase it by $500 billion per year from its current level of $1 trillion. Now that the US is engaged in a full-scale war that could drag on indefinitely and upend the world's geopolitical map, Trump's case for a significant increase in defence spending would seem to have grown even stronger.

Of course, it is too early to gauge the direct costs of the war, since nobody knows how long and intensive it will be. But we do know that it is currently costing around $1 billion per day. The bill for the month-long conflict that Trump is anticipating therefore would approach $50 billion, with the costs continuing to rise the longer the war continues.

Beyond the direct costs of replacing US ammunition and equipment, there will be other reasons for augmenting the defence budget. For starters, the Pentagon may need to prepare for a scenario in which the entire Middle East is destabilised, especially if the Trump administration follows through on arming the Iranian Kurds, which will antagonise Turkey and perhaps incite other separatist movements within Iran. Second, with America's attention diverted, Russia and China could see an opportunity to press their claims in Ukraine and Taiwan, respectively, demanding even greater US military spending to maintain deterrence.

No free lunches As the Nobel laureate economist Milton Friedman was fond of saying, there is no such thing as a free lunch. Nowhere is this maxim more aptly applied than to military interventions. The wars in Vietnam, Iraq, and Afghanistan all demonstrated that the US is not good at choosing between guns and butter.

It always seems to want both, even though pursuing both risks generating inflationary pressure. This is an especially relevant concern today. According to the Congressional Budget Office, the US can expect to run budget deficits exceeding 6 per cent of GDP as far as the eye can see. That means it is on track to exceed the debt-to-GDP ratio at the end of World War II.

The Trump administration may not care about America's deteriorating public finances, but bond markets certainly do. Normally when geopolitical tensions are heightened, international investors rush towards the safety of US Treasuries. But in yet another sign that foreign investors might be losing their appetite for US debt, bond yields have been rising since the start of the Iran war.

With the US government financing a $2 trillion budget deficit and rolling over around $9 trillion in maturing bonds this year, a loss of foreign appetite for its debt is the last thing it needs. The US also is in no position to absorb an energy-price shock. But that is what seems to be in store. In its fight for survival, the Iranian regime is desperately trying to export the war to its Gulf neighbours and disrupt shipping in the Strait of Hormuz, through which 20 per cent of the world's oil supply passes.

On March 4, Goldman Sachs estimated that a five-week closure of this crucial waterway could send oil prices over $100 per barrel. In fact, that threshold has now already been breached. Oil price worries Even though the US economy is far less dependent on oil imports than it was during previous energy-price surges, it certainly would not be immune to a near doubling of the oil price since the start of the year.
