Category: Editorial
Title: The burden of AI adoptions Part Two

The burden of AI adoptions

Second, where will the water for cooling servers come from? The proposed Meta AI facility in Jamnagar is expected to use desalinated sea water for cooling. This can ensure preservation of water supplies for local use. Other data centres coming up close to coasts might be able to do the same, unless they take to more expensive techniques like liquid cooling of AI chips.

This, however, brings up another important issue in the development trajectory of data centres. Coastal states of the country are likely to attract more data centres due to the advantage of using sea water. As it is, coastal states like Andhra and Gujarat are closer to underwater subsea cables that make them digitally more attractive for US big-tech promoted data centres.

Might this generate a hinterland-coast divide in concentration of AI centre investments? Third, where will the land for data centres come from? The electricity capacities of data centres in the form of power generators and substations, and water-cooling systems, require large spaces. The US experience of building these data centres shows that the hyperscale ones can require up to as much as 1,000 acres or more.

Such tracts of barren land are not easily available in coastal Indian states. Might it mean that farmlands, and ecologically fragile land precious for local communities, need to be taken up for the data centres? Globally, discontent against AI data centres is rising because of the pressures they are generating on energy, water, and land.

India is walking a delicate path in this regard. It is yet to be hit as badly on jobs by AI as several other countries of the world, including the Global North. The hit, though, might just be around the corner, with many white-collar tech jobs awaiting the chop. Indeed, several businesses are citing AI for justifying layoffs.

Coupled with the stress put on scare and sustainable natural resources, the employment squeeze can make AI politically unacceptable. It is not just Pope Leo who's called for disarming AI. Conservative ideologues are describing AI as new immigration with serious cultural, social, and economic consequences and urging action to stop its progress.

Tech experts spelling out virtues of AI are being protested in global university campuses. The politics of AI is assuming highly sensitive proportions. India needs to be careful in managing the economic downsides of AI infrastructure growth. The consequences might aggravate the political backlash on AI.

Written by Amitendu Palit
