Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part Five

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

Educity Iskandar (near Johor, Malaysia) has campuses of a half-dozen British universities, thus becoming a competitor for India. Another competitor is the UAE with around 40 international branch campuses, including branches of Indian institutions such as Manipal, BITS Pilani, IIT Delhi, Symbiosis International University, and IIM Ahmedabad, among others. China is a special case  -  a large country with a strong higher education system, China is beginning to focus on internationalisation, providing scholarships to international students, establishing branch campuses outside China as for example, a large branch in Malaysia, Xiamen University Malaysia, and exploring possibilities in Africa, the Gulf, the U.K., and the U.S.

China currently has 11 international branch campuses that operate in partnerships with Chinese host institutions. These developments make it clear that India's branch campus strategy will face stiff competition. Education hubs in Asia and the Gulf are already well-established, offering both regulatory flexibility and strong infrastructure support  -  the impact of the current Gulf conflict on higher education is unclear.

Student mobility The sad fact is the many students who go abroad for study do not intend to return home. This traditionally has been true for many of the "best and brightest" (just look at the large number of Indians who are tech moguls in the U.S.) as well as workers in pharmacies and restaurants. Massive numbers of Chinese students have become part of the diaspora  -  though return rates have increased in recent years partly due to Chinese government programmes but mainly because of economic challenges and xenophobia in host countries.

At present, some of the largest increases in international student mobility are from Nepal and Bangladesh  -  due mainly to dire economic circumstances and political uncertainty in those countries. It would be unrealistic to expect the emigration motivation to disappear, including for India, though most of the destination countries have become significantly less friendly to immigrants. Immediate concern The current geopolitical environment is marked by volatility that directly affects international higher education.

While the influx of foreign branch campuses signals confidence in India's market potential, policy must ensure that these institutions do not function as isolated enclaves detached from local academic and social ecosystems. While India aims to become an education hub, addressing many existing gaps is essential to transform the sector. The large majority of Indian higher education institutions do not have basic infrastructure for international higher education.

Some of this lacuna can be fixed without huge expenditures. For example, those universities that have the potential for attracting foreign collaboration and students  -  a small proportion of the total  -  need to professionalise services for the international community, provide appropriate hostels and laboratories, and in general, create an attractive atmosphere for collaboration. This takes resources but even more it requires expertise and commitment.

Such an approach is essential to develop an internationalisation model that enhances quality, safeguards national interests, and engages the global academic system on balanced and mutually beneficial terms. Philip G. Altbach is professor and distinguished fellow emeritus, Center for International Higher Education, Boston College, United States.
