Category: Editorial
Title: The fallout of the crisis in West Asia on Part One

The fallout of the crisis in West Asia on India's economy

West Asia on India's economy The non-availability of fertilisers and other chemicals would affect the agricultural output in the Kharif season which will start from June While the Russia-Ukraine war shows no sign of abatement, another major crisis in West Asia has hit the global economy. This war has disrupted production, storage, and transport of various energy products including crude oil, natural gas and fertilizers, and has led to supply disruptions and increase in sectoral prices. There is a serious, although partial, blockade of the Strait of Hormuz, thereby restricting the passage of crude oil, gas and other petroleum products as well as other goods.

Even if matters get resolved in the near future, it may take considerable time for the normalisation of the supply chain. However, even the temporary ceasefire that has been agreed to has brought down the Brent crude oil price from $109.3 per barrel as on April 7 and 8, to about $95. India has been diversifying its sources of imported crude oil, gas and fertilizers.

At present, India is importing crude oil from 41 source countries. In fact, India's dependence on imported crude has been increasing in recent years and it is presently close to 90%. The relevant crude price index for India is the Indian crude basket comprising Sweet grade (Brent) and Sour grade (Oman and Dubai average), which remains linked to the global crude oil price (average of Brent, WTI and Dubai).

Considering the average of March 2026, the Indian crude basket was about 19% higher than the global crude price. The rise in the price of the Indian crude basket in March 2026 was over 64.5% that of February 2026 on average, even though the price increase for end-users was moderated. With the temporary ceasefire, the Indian basket has come down to $120.28 per barrel on April 9, 2026 from the peak of $157 per barrel on March 23, 2026  - that is by a margin of $37/bbl.

Multiple stressors The impact on the Indian economy will come through several channels. First is supply disruptions. Supply bottlenecks will affect production processes primarily in energy intensive sectors. However, any disruptions in these sectors would cascade into other sections of the economy, with the affected industries likely being textiles, paints, chemicals, fertilizers, cement and tyres among others.

The non-availability of fertilizers and other chemicals particularly would affect the agricultural output in the Kharif season which will start from June. Secondly, logistics. Storage and transport are highly energy intensive. Increased logistics costs will lead to the increase in the prices of all final products through cascading.

Third, Indian exports will take a hit from both demand and supply sides. The demand side will be affected not only due to disruptions in West Asia but also due to a slowdown in other countries, including the U.S. and Europe. The share of India's merchandise exports to West Asian countries was 16.4% of total merchandise exports in 2024-25.

The depreciation of the rupee, that is already underway, may partially help Indian exporters. Fourth, exchange rate and remittances will be affected. The Indian rupee has been depreciating in recent months. The rate of depreciation has accelerated after the start of the West Asian crisis. As global crude prices, and the prices of fertilizers and other energy products also increase, there would be an additional demand for the dollar and other hard currencies; the exchange rate will be under pressure.
