Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part Extra Second

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

Maintainability could be an issue too when a complex bug surfaces, owing to the cognitive ownership not residing in human minds. Governance and cybersecurity risks Studies reveal that AI-generated code has some inherent cyber vulnerabilities, arising from vibe coders sacrificing safe levels of threat modelling and authentication for speed. This is accentuated when the audit logic is weak, and apps deployed look perfect, but invite AI-driven exploits by hackers.

Attackers are now getting smarter, concealing commands inside requests, using true or false questions to reconstruct the database structure, or making the database send information to servers they control for stealthy exfiltration of sensitive credentials. The natural consequence of coding at the speed of chat is that human oversight becomes the bottleneck, unable to catch all security flaws or compliance drifts across vast codebases. Agentic governance could be the answer, with specialised AI supervisors playing the role of real-time gatekeepers.

Vibe coding without digital guardrails is an invitation to trouble. Scaling paradox Coders say that building the first 80% of a solution or app, using vibe coding, is incredibly easy, and building the rest, involving scaling, edge cases, and integration, equally complex. That's also why scaling beyond the initial vision could prove to be a limitation.

Another aspect to be wary about is that while AI is great at local optimisation, it may take shortcuts that contradict architectural decisions taken several prompts before. This recency bias causes drift, creating a patchwork of conflicting logic over time. And when a bug is encountered, the tendency of AI to patch the symptom rather than refactor the root cause compounds later navigation.

One way of tackling this could be through modular orchestration, breaking the app into isolated, modular components and then integrating them, a more elaborate path. Scaling certainly separates the hobbyist from production grade coding - which demands experienced, patient, nurturing hands and minds. Creating value Vibe coding is a major structural realignment vis-à-vis creating value from software, a tectonic shift from syntax-centric programming to AI-assisted software development that prioritises human thinking.

And a profound shift away from dealing with semicolon placement, function signatures, and compiler errors, as in the past. When human creativity embraces heavy-duty agentic sweat work, it needs hi-fidelity orchestration - very different from traditional, lengthy IT projects with inherent scope creeps - to sectoral specialists aiming to solve real problems more directly with digital interventions. With the right levels of human scrutiny based on risk profiles and application criticality, appropriate engineering leadership, and security guardrails, the underlying competitive advantage awaits capture.

It's not about whether to embrace vibe coding, but how! By Anil Nair, founder, ThinkStreet Dry run IMD needs to provide a realistic assessment on El Nino Even as analysts are still working out the implications of the Iran conflict on the economy, trouble seems to be brewing on another front  -  the upcoming monsoon. Global weather watchers are now forecasting a likely re-emergence of El Nino this year.

World Meteorological Organisation in its early March update said that fading La Nina conditions could morph into a warming El Nino episode by May to July with a 40 per cent probability. The recent European Centre for Medium Term Weather Forecasts prediction is more direct, with a 22 per cent chance of a 'super' El Nino, an 80 per cent chance of a strong one and 98 per cent chance of a moderate event this year. Should such forecasts come good, the Indian economy could face headwinds on both growth and inflation, calling for policy vigilance.
