Category: Editorial
Title: The nationalism that evokes pride the nation Part Two

The nationalism that evokes pride, the nation we are

Nehru reminds his audience that only two courses are open to India's destiny: "Either to hold our heads high and march forward or downfall if we are weak. There can be no middling status for us." This is meant to be a call for action. But then he immediately goes on to say, "However, this is not in my hands.

You have made me Prime Minister for a few days so I am here. There are innumerable defects in me." This could be false modesty, absolving himself from blame, or merely reminding his audience that the nation will not be made from declamations from on high. But then comes the mirror to the nation. Referring to India's Independence, Nehru said "After hundreds of years, India shone once again and the world heard her voice, which had a profound impact because it was the true inner voice of the nation.

India began to be respected once again. But very soon the same people of India who had shown great courage seemed to revert to their own weaknesses and began to fight among themselves in the name of religion or caste, language and province. The world began to wonder if it had made a mistake in judging this nation." Shastri's first speech as Prime Minister was pithy and direct, this time confronting the fact that India was facing a potentially catastrophic food crisis.

In Nehru's speeches, the confrontation with fragility, vulnerability and uncertainty is central. There is the constant refrain that there are two dispositions that can keep India down. The first is pettiness. Pettiness is not the same as self-interest. Self-interest can at least be tied to prudence; pettiness is more destructive.

It is almost as if Nehru is haunted by Gandhi's remark, that "our besetting sin is not our differences, it is our littleness". The second is fear. He writes: "Telling lies and deceit are all the offspring of fear." Prime Minister Narendra Modi's speeches over the years have been varied. The Viksit Bharat framework has one virtue.

It puts a timeline on Ram Rajya's arrival. Ezekiel's "one day" is 2047. But Modi is focused on satisfying the pleasure principle of nationalism. That has got trapped in its own circular logic. India is great because now we have to learn to speak of ourselves as great, and the more bombast with which we speak, the more evidence we have of our greatness.

In 2014, the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan forcefully confronted India's filth. But alas for the reality principle, it seems like our national self-esteem has, since then, reached heights our municipal councils are yet to discover. Written by: Pratap Bhanu Mehta The writer is contributing editor, The Indian Express
