Category: Editorial
Title: The fallout of the crisis in West Asia on Part Two

The fallout of the crisis in West Asia on India's economy

Moreover, India receives a considerable number of remittances from Indians employed in the Gulf countries. These remittances are bound to go down, adding further pressure on the exchange rate. However, any improvement in the overall environment may lift the rupee. In fact, the sharp decline in the value of the rupee has been caused mainly by the substantial capital outflows triggered by uncertainty and fear.

When the war ends, the value of the rupee will also rise. The net Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) outflows in March 2026 amounted to $13.6 billion, which is huge. Fifth, is the current account deficit. The fall in the volume of Indian exports is expected to be accompanied by an increase in the value of Indian imports leading to an increase in the current account deficit, if the war continues.

Sixth is rising inflation. Cost push inflation would affect relative prices in sectors that are directly affected such as petroleum products, fertilizers etc. However, if liquidity also increases, there would be pressure on overall inflation. The country needs to avoid any large liquidity increases. And finally is the fiscal deficit problem.

The Government of India may have to provide additional subsidies to Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) as it insists on keeping retail prices at present levels. While to some extent, the reduction in excise duty on petrol and diesel would reduce losses for the OMCs, it would be a direct revenue loss to the Indian government. If real GDP growth goes down and profit margins fall for major producers, there will be an adverse impact on the government's tax revenues.

State finances will also be affected due to lower economic activity. Their share in tax devolution would be adversely affected if the Central government's tax revenues go down. States may also face pressure to reduce sales tax/VAT on petroleum products. In fact, the government must rethink the reduction in excise duty on petroleum products.

The present move is due to the ongoing State elections. After that, the retail prices should go up, if the war resumes. In that situation, the higher price may constrain demand which is desirable. Myriad policy responses As per information shared by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) chairman on March 27, the fortnightly loss on account of lower excise duties on petrol and diesel will be ₹7,000 crore whereas there would be a gain of ₹1,500 crore per fortnight on account of export tax on Aviation Turbine Fuel.

This implies a net loss of ₹5,500 crore per fortnight, translating into an annual loss in tax revenue of about ₹1,32,000 crore for the government, should the crisis continue for the full year. In all likelihood, food, fertilizers and petroleum subsidies would be higher than their budget estimates for 2026-27. As already mentioned, retail prices must be allowed to go up so long as crude prices remain high.

Although it is difficult to estimate the quantitative impact of the current crisis, some impacts were given by the RBI in its October 2025 Monetary Policy Report. In their estimates, for every 10% increase in the price of the Indian crude basket from a baseline of $70 per barrel, that is an increase of $7 per barrel, real GDP growth may fall by around 15 basis points. Further, assuming full pass-through to domestic product prices, inflation would be higher by 30 basis points.
