Category: Editorial
Title: The burden of AI adoptions Part One

The burden of AI adoptions

India must be careful in managing the economic downsides Ai is kicking up more controversy at every step of the way. Pope Leo's call to prevent AI from being deployed for malicious uses, including replacing human relationships, depicts AI as a general-purpose technology capable of causing significant harm. The burden of AI adoption can have significant social, political, and economic repercussions for India and the Global South.

India has been emphasising safe, trusted, and ethical use of AI. Preventing AI from becoming an instrument of domination will require the world to make rules for serving the purpose. Such rules, though, are currently elusive. India and the Global South must be ready to address challenges arising from building larger AI capacities.

Resource Strain Globally, AI infrastructure growth is causing major strains on natural resources. Demand for electricity is increasing at exponential rates. Along with electricity, there is high demand for use of water. Both demands are compounded with rising appetite for vast tracts of land. All three will manifest in India as it builds more AI data centres.

AI data centres require huge computing power. Generative AI like ChatGPT and Claude need to continuously process data for staying advanced and updated. Computing capacities of data centres, especially the hyperscale ones that host thousands of servers and run accelerated graphics processing units (GPUs), require high uninterrupted supply of electricity, and water for cooling the overworked systems.

The big data centres with large computing capacities also need sizable pieces of land to grow. The International Energy Agency estimates servers to account for more than 60% of energy demand coming from data centres. The share rises to almost 80% for servers in hyperscale data centres. The latter also require billions of litres of water annually, for cooling the chips used for computing.

Water is needed for energy generation as well. Looked at in the context of India becoming an important destination for building AI infrastructure and large data centres, the above conditions highlight some concerns. Triple Threat First, electricity demand by AI data centres pressurises electricity grids.

The state grids will need to ramp up overall output since supplies to households, agriculture, and other industries can't be compromised. Electricity producers will need to expand capacities for generating more power, bringing to head a critical problem: can more electricity be generated without resorting to greater use of fossil fuels? The ostensible answer is no.

Without using more coal and natural gas the electricity output can't be increased making for carbon footprints an unavoidable outcome. The data centres in India involving the US big tech  -  Google and Meta  -  that are coming up in Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh and Jamnagar in Gujarat are to run on captive renewable energy. They might also go off-grid for fetching power directly from renewable producers.

While this can limit additional emissions by containing use of fossil fuels, it can also create different incentives for renewables: independent, especially smaller producers of the latter, might be more incentivised to sell off grid to data centres instead of national or state grids. Furthermore, not all large data centres will have the capacity to internally finance captive renewable capacities. They will have to rely on the common grids, thereby making use of more fossil fuels for generating electricity an almost unavoidable option.
