Category: Editorial
Title: The US Treasury wants lower bond yields But Part Three

The US Treasury wants lower bond yields. But will it work?

But the caveat is that fresh money could also push inflation higher. And third, the economy itself could change. If investors expect slower growth or lower inflation, yields generally fall. For now, the most realistic hope is that the US-Iran war ends, easing supply disruptions through the Strait of Hormuz, particularly for oil.

Otherwise, shuffling debt around may not do much beyond taking yields down on expectations, and then pushing them back up again. A tale of two systems India-China comparisons don't make sense. The two countries are chalk and cheese Another BRICS summit is over. China with its trade surpluses was clearly the overwhelming big daddy.

It accounts for over 60 per cent of intra-BRICS trade and investment. Russia with its oil ran a close second. India trailed far behind with nine tail-enders. Many people in India are full of admiration for China's economic success, like they were for Pakistan in the 1980s. But Pakistan went phut because it didn't have the political systems and institutions to sustain growth.

China has the same problem. From 1950 to 1980 we admired and copied the USSR which also went phut in 1990. That's why I always ask people who admire China if they would like to swap our political system and institutions with China's. No answer is forthcoming. But let's leave aside the politics and sociology and examine the India-China comparisons from a purely economic lens.

The starting point has to be the acknowledgement that neoclassical economics is founded on the idea of political liberties, which China doesn't permit. But we have a surfeit of these liberties. Chinese GDP, meanwhile, is $20 trillion. Ours is not even five. So the question has to be whether the absence of such liberties facilitates rapid growth in industrial output.

In China it does, but in the USSR it didn't. The West also didn't have full political liberties  -  of the sort we have had since 1950  -  till about 50 years ago. You can check this out. Capital or labour There can be no doubt whatsoever that political liberties and rapid economic growth are inversely related.

When you expand one, the other contracts. The more you have of the former the slower will the latter be. Look at East Asia after 1990. There are no exceptions to this rule because growth depends on giving primacy to capital. Strange as it may sound, this is Marx 101. And it's not just China, all the 'Asian Tigers' were like that.

This has been said by several Nobel winning economists as well. Unconstrained optimisation means capital flows into China and flows out of India. Period. Our emphasis on liberties means capital gets short shrift. All our laws favour labour because we are a rights-based society. And when we try to correct the imbalance, as in 1991 or 2006 or 2019, there is protest.

Just look at the number of trades unions and NGOs jumping up and down all the time and laying siege to the Supreme Court. It must be asked why liberals object to a politically hard state, which is what we need for ever increasing investment and industrial output. You can't have one without the other.

It doesn't work like that. Also, when was the last time anyone compared Indian agricultural performance with China's? India achieved food self-sufficiency in the 1970s, so much so that the massive drought of 1979 went unnoticed by the world. China is nowhere near it. In fact, food is one of China's biggest vulnerabilities alongside energy.
