Category: Editorial
Title: The RBI policy trilemma Part Two

The RBI policy trilemma

Hence, talks of a rate hike is premature and out of context at this point. The other option in this case is the RBI reversing the policy stance of adequate liquidity resorting to sell buy swap transactions/open market operation sales to suck out liquidity. But will that be a feasible option, as it will result in hardening of interest rates, especially when we are facing the weakest monsoon perhaps in decades?

This also could result in financial instability when global economy faces renewed uncertainty. The global economic scenario is complicated. The US-Iran conflict has flared up again. The US is facing a contrasting mix of strong labour-market data and renewed inflation concerns. Its economy added far more jobs than market expectations, while the unemployment rate remained steady at 4.3% in May.

At the same time, US inflation rose to 4.2% in May (the highest in nearly three years) largely because of energy-price pressures. This has revived market concerns about the possibility of rates remaining higher for longer, or even the risk of a further tightening bias by the Federal Reserve if inflation persists. Financial markets have reacted to this uncertainty.

Technology-and AI-linked equities, which had earlier benefitted from expectations of easier monetary policy and abundant liquidity, have become more vulnerable to corrections as US yields remain elevated. Metal prices and other global commodities are also adjusting much lower to the risk of persistent inflation and tighter financial conditions. It is now entirely possible that once US growth falters, the Fed may chip in with liquidity bolstering measures to support growth that might reverse current market moves.

History shows that during the earlier FCNR(B) mobilisation episode in 2013, domestic interest rates moved lower over the following years, with policy rates declining from elevated levels in early 2014 at 8% to 6% by August 2017 as oil prices crashed. While the current context is different, the broad lesson remains relevant: credible foreign currency mobilisation can curb external vulnerability, improve confidence, and create space for domestic financial conditions to at least ease over time. Finally, a word of caution.

At this juncture, the central bank should continue to adopt a more forceful and unambiguous intervention strategy to arrest any dramatic fall in rupee value as a powerful signalling move, as the rupee has continued to depreciate even after the measures were announced. In the current environment, a passive approach could prove costly. Besides, it is important that the RBI looks through words of wisdom from the market and noted economists, such as the rupee being allowed to touch 100.

We must appreciate that pandering to the whims of markets and or comments, often called "Greenspan Put", allows the market players to dictate terms to the central bank by taking positions to cater to their own interest. Written by Soumya Kanti Ghosh
