Category: Editorial
Title: The rise of China and fall of WTO Part Two

The rise of China and fall of WTO

China is the biggest producer and exporter of many goods  -  textiles, iron and steel, office equipment, etc. China's GDP has also surged from $1.6 trillion in 2003 to the second-largest ($18.7 trillion) in 2024. While China surpassed expectations on growth, it lagged in compliance. It reduced tariffs and non-tariff barriers but continued to aggressively deploy industrial policy to push its exports by providing cheap credit, subsidies, and non-financial support.

There have been violations of IP rights and allegations of keeping its exchange rate undervalued. WTO member countries have filed several disputes against China. The global shocks of 2008 crisis, Covid-19, and wars have led to rising protectionism. China has faced a slowdown in growth due to the same factors and has turned protectionist as well.

China's rise has also fuelled a trade war between it and the US. The US has a large trade deficit, the highest with China. In both his presidential terms, Donald Trump has raised tariffs on Chinese exports (and other nations), followed by retaliation from China. The trade war is threatening to undo the progress made after WWII.

China has also taken other steps to challenge US hegemony, such as the Belt and Road Initiative, trade invoicing in renminbi, and providing aid to developing countries. It believes most global institutions are US-governed and is creating its own ecosystem. The US-China gridlock in turn has fuelled geopolitical uncertainty.

Countries are back to signing bilateral and regional trade agreements, undoing years of progress towards multilateral trade. Though it has just been 25 years of China's WTO membership, it seems as if a century has passed. The period has seen seismic shifts that could be expected to span 100 years. The US, once a supporter of China joining the organisation, is now deserting the organisation.

The WTO itself has been reduced to a mere bystander watching the collapse of multilateral trade. By Amol Agrawal, The author teaches at the National Institute of Securities Markets
