Category: Editorial
Title: The longterm implications of the USIran deal Part Two

The long-term implications of the U.S.-Iran deal

First, the two Iran wars have dramatically overturned numerous basic global assumptions. It has shown the limits of American hyperpower with its penchant for military solutions, high-tech battlefield dominance, air superiority doctrine, social media-provoked mass uprising etc. Iran was able to counter this with incipient strategies; careful planning for asymmetric warfare; smart and cost-effective tactics; a resilient and coherent command structure; leveraging of geostrategic assets; resolute supply chains and defence production among others.

American MAGA (Make America Great Again) hotheads and Chinese wolf-warriors may need to pull in their claws, hopefully, making the world a safer place. Moreover, the failure of ad-hoc coercive diplomacy may bring back multilateralism. Nations are now going to fret more about choke points, preventive diplomacy, robust supply lines, and adequate strategic reserves for essential inputs.

Physical security and the succession of command of the political leadership would be prioritised and ruggedised. Second, the hobbled return to regional peace may be catastrophic for global hydrocarbon supplies as depleting strategic reserves compete with demand destruction. In the long-term, high prices and volatility would destroy demand and hasten us towards the 'peak oil' scenario (a hypothetical point where global crude oil demand reaches its maximum rate and begins to decline).

The disruptions have underscored the indispensability of higher strategic oil reserves and clean energy. Third, there are two regional shifts which are currently underway. While U.S.- Israel relations remain strategic, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's mesmerisation of Mr. Trump has waned. The GCC states were traumatised by the U.S.-Israel coalition's "wars of choice".

Apart from the collateral damage from Iranian attacks on their vital infrastructure, their exports via Hormuz also suffered. To add insult to injury, Washington neither consulted the GCC nor adequately protected them from Iranian retaliation. Moreover, the Pentagon's failure to anticipate the Iranian regime's staying power, Hormuz closure, or a plausible exit strategy has raised doubts about its war planning.

This unsavoury experience has seriously undermined America's credibility as a security provider for the GCC. They are likely to reassess their geostrategic alignments as they contend with a weakened but defiant Iran. Their sub-optimal past experiences with external defence tie-ups may leave them with a Hobson's choice to shore up their defences, either individually or collectively.

Given the GCC disunity, especially the Saudi-Emirati rivalry, burying their hatchets may not be easy, forcing them to accommodate and appease Iran individually. Alternatively, the Iranian grip on the Arab world's Shia militias, particularly in Iraq, may loosen, allowing a reassertion of their Arab and tribal identities. A more defiant Iran Fourth, while the Iranian state has defied existential threats, it has now convulsed and radicalised.

Regionally friendless, the theocratic regime is in suspended apprehension amidst escalating foreign pressure and a brewing domestic blowback. Left to themselves, the Iranian leadership would insist on a strategic deterrence based on both nuclear latency and control of the Strait of Hormuz. But they also realise that this maximalism may scupper the forthcoming negotiations.

A small but significant minority of Iran's leadership now believes that the Iranian capacity to block the Strait of Hormuz is the new and more potent deterrence than nuclear ambiguity. Instead of ensuring the Islamic Republic's survival, Iran's nuclear fixation has attained the opposite: entrenching Israel-U.S. enmity against it.
