Category: Editorial
Title: The enduring democratic message of a royal Part Two

The enduring democratic message of a royal charter

We will sell to no man, we will not deny or defer to any man either Justice or Right." The phrase has been used down the centuries as a metaphor. As a barrister working for Indian South Africans' political rights in the late 19th century, Mohandas K. Gandhi cited Queen Victoria's extinguishing the overarching powers of the East India Company over the destiny of India in her Proclamation of 1858, as a Magna Carta.

In 1948, Eleanor Roosevelt, while working on the UN Declaration of Human Rights as the committee's Chair, famously called the UN document the "international Magna Carta of all men everywhere". Winston Churchill referred to it as a "law which is above the King", and argued that the reaffirmation of a supreme law justified the respect it has held through time. Contextual messaging King Charles was not handing down to the U.S.

Congress a tedious lesson in the history of the historical Magna Carta. But he did something that was altogether classy. Knowing full well that he was addressing a House comprising both Republican and Democratic legislators, he knew that when he said to that gathering, that the Magna Carta made the King subservient to the law, his listeners would transpose his remarks right onto what is happening in the U.S., to its state and government.

The King made more than one reference to the Magna Carta, and mentioned the fact that the parchment linked the political history of Great Britain and the U.S. inextricably, that a large number of judgments in the U.S. courts cited Magna Carta, making that tract a U.K.-U.S. bond. But it was when he said very simply and matter-of-factly, that the Magna Carta had made "executive power subject to checks and balances", that the House, after a moment of reflective absorption, rose in a thunderous standing ovation.

All present, starting doubtless with Democrats, saw before them a direct successor to King John of Magna Carta fame, speaking of the Magna Carta's limiting arbitrariness in the monarch  -  a huge, self-limiting, self-denying, self-critical exposition of 'due process' of the rule of law as being above the person of the ruler, with the Magna Carta being above the King. The importance of the 'Magna' code The speech's salience in today's Washington aside, it should be seen as having been made to all Parliaments and legislators across the world, affirming that all people of the world  -  whether in the west or east, north or south, geographically or metaphorically  -  live with the expectation that the laws governing them are made by their representatives, for a humane, just, and moral order. That they are implemented fairly, equitably, transparently.

That those in charge of the process are not governed by whims, caprice or bias. And that they are subservient to such laws, not the other way around. And that waging wars, waging peace are part of that 'Magna' code. The speech, having been made in the parliament of what is called, not unambiguously, the world's oldest (continuous constitutional) democracy, was not partisan.

It was not taking sides between elected legislators of diverse opinion and the executive. Indeed, it could not have, in good protocol and better prudence. It said, without stating it explicitly, that the spirit of the Magna Carta holds that those seeking and receiving popular mandates to form an executive are also under the scrutiny of parallel and co-extensive checks and balances.
