Category: Editorial
Title: The PhD deadend Why so many of Indias Part One

The PhD dead-end: Why so many of India's research scholars consider quitting

Of India's research scholars consider quitting The major challenge for researchers, cutting across disciplines, is taking intellectual risks and critiquing established concepts and theories in their respective fields According to PubMed and OECD, the US, China, Germany, India and the UK produced the highest number of doctorates in recent years. India has a fairly large number of PhD holders, but the attrition rate is also quite high. A sizable percentage of research students abandon their research for various reasons.

The challenges faced by PhD students in India can be grouped under seven headings: Intellectual risk-taking, publication, supervisory, office procedures, funding, time, and mental well-being. Though the role played by each of the factors is different, their cumulative effect needs to be highlighted. The major challenge for researchers, cutting across disciplines, is taking intellectual risks and critiquing established concepts and theories in their respective fields.

Most PhD theses submitted to Indian institutions have hardly anything new to say. Most research projects are an extension of the research supervisor's work and/or a continuation of their seniors' work in that lab. There is hardly any interdisciplinary, translational or applied research. It is high time that our institutions undertake research that transcends disciplinary boundaries and eschews academic tribalism.

Translational research that brings together basic science and clinical practice aimed at improving healthcare should be prioritised. Applied research that bridges the gap between theory and action should be supported. In other words, new types of research aimed at pushing the boundaries of knowledge should be fostered.

Secondly, publishing in reputed journals is a major challenge for researchers. In fact, all universities insist on research publications as a prerequisite for thesis submission. Publication, irrespective of disciplines and domains, is not easy to come by for several reasons. Editors have substantial backlogs to deal with, and therefore, research scholars have to wait for months together to see their contributions in print and that too after repeated revisions.

It is almost impossible for novices to break into the elite group and publish in Q1 and Q2 journals, and those with a high impact factor straightaway. This not only makes the wait longer but also multiplies the chances of rejection. Because of repeated rejections and the increasing pressure to publish or perish, some, lured by predatory journals, resort to shortcuts.

Institutional support and a little handholding, at least in the initial stages, would help research scholars navigate their research journey successfully. Third, the research supervisor's role is crucial. At one extreme, there are taskmasters who are very demanding, and at the other end, there are supervisors who are indifferent to their research scholars and their progress.

While some supervisors plot their candidates' progress meticulously, there are some who do not have the faintest idea of their students' progress. There are supervisors who sit over their candidates' submissions for months together and do not bother to return them, even after repeated reminders. Fourth, complex administrative procedures not only consume a lot of time but also drain the energy of research scholars.

For instance, getting sanction letters for attending conferences and seminars, and utilisation certificates to be sent to funding agencies on time, is a nightmare for many scholars. Office procedures should be made relatively easy so that research scholars are able to devote more time and energy to their research and are not bogged down by mindless office procedures. Fifth, lack of funding and delayed disbursals are a major source of tension for many research candidates.
