Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part Four

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

Inflation is being driven by supply constraints, so trying to reduce demand by raising interest rates will not only have a minimal impact on inflation but could also further hurt growth when fuel constraints are already impacting it. The onus lies with the government and its efforts to expedite alternative sources of fuel. A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education While the country aims to become an education hub, addressing many existing gaps such as poor basic infrastructure is essential to transform the sector Perhaps surprisingly, international higher education, including branch campuses, student mobility, degree franchising, and related issues, has suddenly become big news in India.

The country wants to be a major player. This heightened attention comes at a time when traditional destination countries are changing their approach to Indian students. Meanwhile, the United Kingdom has emerged as the most aggressive player in establishing physical presence in India, with the largest pipeline of branch campuses in the country.

Several prestigious U.K. institutions  -  including Queen's University Belfast, Bristol, Liverpool, York, Aberdeen, and Lancaster  - have formally committed to opening Indian campuses, and the University of Southampton just opened a campus in the Delhi region. Curiously, several of the main host countries are hoping to establish beachheads in India at the same time they are turning Indian students away.

It is in this context that two influential reports have recently appeared  - "Internationalisation of higher education in India: potential and policy recommendations" from NITI Aayog and the U.K.'s international education strategy from the British government must be critically assessed. The latter gained momentum as it followed a high-profile visit of U.K. Prime Minister Keir Starmer and a group of eager British Vice-Chancellors to India last year, moving this niche topic to a wider discussion and policy relevance.

India's ambition to establish itself as an education hub by hosting foreign campuses reflects these shifting dynamics, and the NITI Aayog report is, therefore, worth examining. Shifting dynamics There has hardly been a more unstable period for higher education globally in the past century. For much of the Anglophone world, there is a strong reaction against immigration, largely because of populism and right-wing nationalism.

The U.S. has created visa bottlenecks and routinely cancels visas. Other U.S. policies are similarly negative  -  such as charging $100,000 for some immigration categories. These and other policies are symptomatic of the Trump administration's xenophobia and incoherence. The U.K., Canada, and Australia are cutting back on the number of international students in country  - preferring to educate them (and collect tuition fees) in their home countries on branch campuses and franchised degrees and twinning arrangements.

Canadian international student numbers have declined to 700,000 from over 1 million in 2024. In the Netherlands, Germany, and other European countries, there has been a reaction against offering English-medium degrees. Online degree programmes are also popular  -  these are offered globally, and tuition payments do not mean student mobility.

It is no surprise that all aspects of internationalisation  -  branch campuses, twinning, and many others are now priorities in a variety of new players in the Global South. Transnational higher education programme delivery through branch campuses are now strategic priorities for many countries in Asia. For instance, Malaysia has become a major higher education hub in Southeast Asia.
