Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part One

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers The Supreme Court is right  -  legislating biology only serves to entrench the belief that women are 'less than' When the Supreme Court struck down a petition to make paid menstrual leave mandatory at the workplace, arguing that it would only reinforce gender stereotyping and biased hiring, there was a subtext intended specifically for women. Chief Justice Surya Kant said that such a law would also "create a psychological fear or impression among working women… that they are 'less than men'." That doubt is real in male-dominated spaces. For a long time, the argument for menstrual leave has been pivoted on benevolent sexism, which allows policymakers to believe they are setting a reformist, gender-equal agenda.

But the fact is that a menstrual leave suggests that women require special treatment because of their biology, that they are different rather than equal. If anything, it undermines their talent, productivity, and physical capacity. Silently, it perpetuates the very feudal thinking that women need to be taken care of for their reproductive health, and they aren't cut out for stronger, ambitious roles outside of motherhood.

Or that wealth creation is for men while women become a complementary human resource, a non-performing asset, even. Let's get this right. Menstruation is a physiological process, not a pathological condition. It's not a disease, and the woman has a lot to thank the hormone estrogen for. Rather than removing a taboo, the "medicalisation" of a normal body process entrenches it deeper.

Yes, the pain is real, but a menstrual leave cannot be a blanket proposition for the following reasons. First, most studies show that approximately only five per cent of women experience menstruation that is considered extremely debilitating or severe enough to disrupt their daily lives, such as requiring them to stay in bed or miss work/school. This usually happens to those suffering from endometriosis.

A company-level intervention and flexible work hours might be more effective in such cases than a mandatory leave, which would seem like an entitlement to male colleagues and peers. Besides, at a time when women are already having a hard time convincing corporate India that they deserve maternity leave and when they are unfairly passed over for promotions, milestone projects, or benefits, menstrual leave could lead to further discrimination and backlash. A menstrual leave policy, therefore, becomes exclusionary rather than being inclusive.

What is needed is for women to understand menstruation in the context of their holistic health. They should pay attention to the root cause of pain, get themselves evaluated for any underlying condition, get into a corrective lifestyle regime, and exercise regularly, all of which have been proven to ease pelvic pain, nausea, anxiety, headaches, and heavy bleeding. While symptomatic relief is available, most women still have inhibitions about seeking medical advice for menstrual cycle-related problems and prefer to cope with a few days of pain like a rite of passage.

As research on hormonal health gathers momentum, studying menstrual patterns can help women get an idea of how they impact their lifestyle diseases. The workplace can become more enabling through simple, thoughtful measures like setting up a medical or resting room and a vending machine for sanitary napkins, stocking relief medication, allowing women flexible work options on bad days, and letting them compensate on good days. It can even consider readjusting or expanding its leave component.
