Category: Editorial
Title: The menstrual leave trap When benevolent Part Three

The menstrual leave trap: When benevolent sexism creates professional barriers (Indian Express) 7 Duty of care: On vaccine injury compensation programmes (The Hindu) 8 Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation (The Hindu) 9 A reality check on Indian ambition for internationalising higher education (The Hindu) 10 Wake up India Inc. sleep is strategy (Financial Express) 11 Software at the speed of chat (Financial Express) 12 Dry run (Business Line) 13 Can US afford Trump's Iran war?

And the U.K., have such vaccine injury compensation programmes where claimants need not prove negligence, but only a plausible link to vaccination. Even the global COVAX facility established a no-fault mechanism for 92 low-and middle-income countries. During the pandemic, the government had reported over 1,100 deaths following vaccination across 219 crore doses administered.

The Court ruled that for a welfare state, these represent individual human lives and that the absence of a formal policy left affected families in a legal vacuum. It has also been clear that its directive is not based on adjudicating whether the vaccines caused specific injuries or deaths nor does it replace all fault-based liabilities in public health. However, it sets an important precedent for future vaccination drives, including the new one for HPV, affirming the state's duty of care when endorsing medical interventions for the public good.

Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation The new series of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), the second data release of which was issued on Thursday, does not yet have enough historical data for robust comparisons, but does include enough information to provide clues about the future. Retail inflation in India quickened to a 10-month high of 3.2% in February 2026, largely driven by food inflation and precious metal prices. This rise is something that the government should take note of early, avoiding any complacency that might have crept in due to the low inflation levels of the last year or so.

Food has a lower weight in the new series as compared to the old one, but is nevertheless a major driver of inflation with a 36.75% weight in the overall CPI. Inflation in food and beverages rose to 3.35% in February from 2.1% in the previous month, driven by quickening price levels in the meat, oils, and fruits and nuts categories. Notably, inflation in tomato prices stood at more than 45%.

Thankfully, this was accompanied by a contraction in prices of the two other staples  -  onions and potatoes  -  by 28% and 18%, respectively. A large part of the low inflation last year was due to a statistical base effect that is now gone. Looking ahead, there are various factors that could result in rapidly rising food inflation.

The first is that climate scientists are predicting the return of the El Niño effect in the middle of the monsoon this year. A weak monsoon will naturally raise food prices. The second impact will depend on how long the conflict in West Asia continues. Sustained natural gas supply constraints will hurt fertilizer production, affecting food output and, eventually, prices.

The other factor that has driven inflation up, and which will likely remain a major driver in the near future, is the price of gold and silver. Gold jewellery saw inflation rise to 48.2% in February from an already-blistering 46.8% in January. Inflation in silver jewellery stood at more than 160% in both January and February.

With global uncertainty and anxiety skyrocketing, the demand for safe-haven precious metals is not going to let up any time soon. Rising oil prices and LPG and LNG shortages are already raising input prices for industry, which will eventually be passed on to consumers. The Reserve Bank of India's Monetary Policy Committee has a tough job in its next meeting in April.
