Category: Editorial
Title: The nationalism that evokes pride the nation Part One

The nationalism that evokes pride, the nation we are

India is great because now we have to learn to speak of ourselves as great, and the more bombast with which we speak, the more evidence we have of our greatness Independence Day discourses, speeches and poetry oscillate between, to borrow Freudian terms, the pleasure principle and the reality principle. The pleasure principle is the affirmation of India's grandeur. It offers, like all nationalisms, a vicarious sense of pride, achievement and hope.

No political project, especially a nation, can thrive without a sense of pride, the mechanism by which we produce identification with a people or a cause. It is difficult for a politician to be successful without evoking pride, self-belief, and even a sense of romance. Anger and a sense of injustice only get you so far in politics.

But almost as a counter-reaction, there is the temptation to counter the pleasure principle with the reality principle: What is the actual state of the nation? The Hindi poet Raghuvir Sahay was the master of this. In his poem 'Adhinayak', he captures the three standard counters used by the reality principle: Authoritarianism, material deprivation and the maintenance of illusion.

He poignantly asked: Who is the Adhinayak who makes us sing these praises? Harcharan, the ordinary impoverished citizen, is conditioned to sing the national anthem, without either true freedom or prosperity. The conditioning is to keep up appearances, to go through the liturgical motions of nationalism, keeping the illusion alive for the rulers that all is well.

We are asked to sing its songs but are not allowed to speak in our own voices. Nissim Ezekiel, in 'The Patriot', used exaggerated Indian English to mock the superficial nationalism during the Emergency. The remarkable thing is that every single theme he touched on in 1977 still applies almost verbatim.

The first is the gap between the professed fidelity to tradition and actual conduct: The profession of non-violence and paeans to Gandhi do not abate the violence. But how much of the adherence to tradition is performative? "Ancient Indian Wisdom is 100% correct/ I should say even 200% correct/ But modern generation is neglecting  -  / Too much going for fashion and foreign thing." There is a reference to unrest: "Other day I'm reading newspaper/ (Every day I'm reading Times of India/ To improve my English Language/ How one goonda fellow/ Threw stone at Indirabehn/ Must be student unrest fellow, I am thinking." The discerning citizen re-reads the goonda as student unrest.

The conversion of a student-unrest fellow into a goonda is the alchemy of the authoritarianism and coercion of Emergency, gestured at in the next lines: "Lend me the ears  - / Everything is coming/ Regeneration, Remuneration, Contraception." There is the genuine concern of the Patriot: "What you think of prospects of world peace? Pakistan behaving like this/ China behaving like that/ It is making me really sad/ I am telling you/ Really, most harassing me." There is a mocking pun on abstinence being mistaken for complete virtue: "I'm the total teetotaller/ completely total." And then there is the poignant: "One day Ram Rajya is surely coming." This very Indian formulation manages to combine complete certainty (surely) with radical uncertainty (one day). If the pleasure principle demands assurance, the reality principle has to confront the radical uncertainty.

Looking at Independence Day speeches, it is quite remarkable how much uncertainty dominates them till Lal Bahadur Shastri's tenure. Jawaharlal Nehru's Independence Day speech in 1960 almost gives up on the pleasure principle in favour of the reality principle. It is all the more remarkable because this is before the war with China in 1962.
