Category: Editorial
Title: the latest accusation levelled by t

the latest accusation levelled by the United States against India has the potential to be the
most harmful to the Indian economy. A recent White House report, naming around 40
countries in all, has said that India ranks among the top 'enablers' of China's evasion of U.S.
tariffs. The accusation is that India and these other countries are importing Chinese goods,
making minor modifications to them, and then exporting them to the U.S. at lower tariffs than
what Chinese goods would have faced. The fact that Chinese imports form a significant pillar of Indian
manufacturing is no secret. Yet, the nature of these imports is slowly changing. India is gradually
moving away from importing finished products, making cosmetic changes, and selling them. Instead,
the share of intermediate goods in Indian imports from China has been steadily rising. That is, India is
doing much of its own assembly and manufacturing in several sectors now, relying on China and other
countries for the parts needed. This shift is an important step towards full-scale manufacturing in India.
The U.S. has not yet announced punitive actions based on its assessment of apparent Chinese tariff
evasion, though that eventuality is conceivable. However, should it do so, India must resist bowing to
U.S. pressure on this issue. As even the government has admitted, Chinese imports right now are an
important part of the Make in India story.
The fear of India bowing to U.S. pressure is based on precedent. In his first term as U.S. President,
Donald Trump railed against India's tariffs on high-end motorcycles. In 2018, India cut these tariffs to
50% from the earlier 60%-75%, and then cut them further to 40% in February 2025, before trade deal
talks had even started. Similarly, it slashed the import duties on shrimp feed and its components in the
February 2024 Budget, a key ask of the U.S. It did the same with tariffs on frozen duck and turkey. The
pressure of the 50% punitive tariffs pushed India to diversify away from Russian oil, despite India's
strident claims of energy sovereignty and the discount it was receiving. Russia's share in India's oil
imports fell to below 20% in January 2026, from nearly double that when the 50% tariffs were imposed
six months earlier. This had happened with Venezuelan oil in 2019 as well. It was the West Asia crisis,
and the U.S.'s temporary reprieve, that has seen India turning back to Russian oil. Allowing FDI in the
e-commerce inventory model, as India recently did, was something Amazon had been lobbying for for a
decade, and a dilution of India's long-held stance. The U.S. can wield immense pressure and so
concessions are understandable. But that has emboldened it to make increasing demands. India
needs to start pushing back.