Category: Editorial
Title: The cartographic war Part Two

The cartographic war

In one move , India cr ushe d Chinese propaganda, planned and pushed for years. Considering Beijing's response, India has evidently hit a raw nerve. This cartographic war coincided with reports on social media of a possible Chinese incursion into Arunachal Pradesh. Similar reports had emerged in June, which were debunked by the army claiming them to be "incorrect and without basis." This time it was the Arunachal Pradesh CM who responded.

He mentioned, "These claims are just rumours and should not be believed." This was however fodder for opposition political parties desperate to corner the government, especially as Parliament was then in session. Unofficial reports mention that an Indo-China standoff occurred in the Taksing sector of Arunachal in late July. India challenging China at its own game is an indicator that New Delhi is unwilling to let China gain the upper hand in lawfare.

Further, it is a message that India will respond to any Chinese attempt to alter the status quo, whether it be cartographic or through intrusions. It displays Indian confidence in managing its ties with China. The release of the Survey of India map came a day after the conclusion of the 36th Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination (WMCC) meeting on border affairs, held in New Delhi on 6 August.

This surprised the Chinese as there was no way they could display their official displeasure. If given an opportunity, they would have cancelled the meeting in protest. In addition, it was released barely a month before the BRICS summit is to be held in New Delhi, which Xi Jinping is expected to attend.

This leaves China with limited options. Either Xi cancels his visit in protest or attends the meet ignoring the Indian action, sending a signal to the world that India, China and Russia stand together, despite differences. If Xi cancels his visit, then India has conveyed the right message by release of the map.

The fact that Vladimir Putin would also be attending and a RIC (Russia-India-China) summit could be on the cards adds to Xi's predicament. The BRICS summit comes in the backdrop of Donald Trump considering enhancing tariffs on India and China over Russian oil procurements. On the contrary, if Xi attends, it could imply that Chinese criticism of the release of the survey map is just a formality.

Simultaneously, prior to any major diplomatic Indo-China activity, there are always possibilities of a Chinese misadventure along the LAC. This provides Xi the upper hand in one-to-one discussions. Indian troops need to be prepared to thwart any such attempt. The July standoff was possibly aimed at this.

The Indian cartographic act called out Chinese hypocrisy. Beijing believed that every announcement of fresh names from its side was justified, solely because of its claim lines. India proved that merely claiming a region does not mean that it belongs to you. Further, the release of the map solidified India's sovereignty over Arunachal, a fact that China can keep questioning.

India also conveyed that Mao's palm and finger theory of Tibet as the palm and Arunachal, Sikkim, Nepal, Bhutan and Ladakh as fingers is history. Having tested the waters and succeeded in Arunachal, it is time for restoring similar historical names to disputed places in the Middle Sector in both Uttarakhand and Himachal. Uttarakhand has special significance as it was the traditional route for the Mansarovar Yatra.

Finally, it should be Ladakh. By HARSHA KAKAR (The writer is a retired Major-General of the Indian)
