Category: Editorial
Title: The global order in Part Two

The global order in 2026

Will this lead perhaps to frameworks centred on Japan, Europe, and parts of the Global South; or perhaps to strengthened ties between these countries and China? The guessing game is on. What is clear is that even America's Asian and European allies are losing confidence in the US. Since the end of the Second World War in 1945, those allies have placed in their alignment with American strategic direction.

The European Union stresses greater autonomy but, lacking a common defence policy, remains economically and militarily dependent on the US. That fact applies, in different ways, to strategically autonomous India. A world without American power cannot come into existence, but developing countries worldwide have had much to lose by the shutdown of USAID, which contributed to their well-being.

Now their expectations of America are minimal. This situation could favour an economically and territorially aggrandising China. Of what transactional value is India for Trump? India figures twice with reference in the NSS to Indo-Pacific security as America's "partner", and once, when Trump takes credit, for the nth time, for pushing nuclear-armed India and Pakistan to agree to a ceasefire in the post-Pahalgam four-day war last summer.

For Trump, commercial ties with India must be improved, "and India must bear a greater share of the burden for Indo-Pacific security", including through continued cooperation with Australia, Japan, and the US in the Quad. The reality is, whether in Asia or Europe, Trump wants strategic partners and allies to spend more on their own defence, while reducing America's military spending. Does MAGA actually represent an insecure US?

All told, Trump wants India to reduce its tariffs on US exports while accepting Washington's duties so that he can Make America Great Again. That wish disguises insecurity. Old foes like Russia and China resent the sole superpower. But even they are surprised that Trump perceives his America as a weakened or weakening country.

Is that why he is determined to make America great again? 2026 will reveal the answers. By Anita Inder Singh, Founding Professor, Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution
