Category: Editorial
Title: The limits of international branch campuses Part One

The limits of international branch campuses

The ultimate value of foreign branch campuses will depend less on their brand and more on their ability to offer something not readily available in India Last month, British Prime Minister Keir Starmer arrived in India with a planeload of vice chancellors. The Indian and U.K. governments announced that several U.K.

universities plan to open branch campuses in India. Some of them have already received University Grants Commission (UGC) approval, while others are in the early stages of the application process. The fact that Mr. Starmer led this delegation can certainly speed up the regulatory approvals and establish these new campuses as legitimate ventures.

However, it is worth analysing this initiative. The need for branch campuses The recent changes in the India-U.K. educational partnership are tied to the broader India-U.K. Vision 2035 and the recently signed India-U.K. Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement. Also, British higher education is undergoing an unprecedented financial crisis, created both by inadequate support from the Starmer government and by a decline in the number of international students going to the U.K.

and paying high fees. It is likely that some British universities are looking to a move to India as a way of earning income from Indians without importing students. But will Indians want to study at a branch campus as a substitute for the "real thing"? Will the branches apply the same standards both for student performance and faculty quality in India as they do on their home campuses?

Branch campuses do not always succeed. And when they fail, students are often left without alternatives. In recent years, several international branch campuses faced significant setbacks. Texas A&M University closed its Qatar campus after two decades of operation. In Europe, the University of Kent's Brussels campus was shut down due to financial pressures.

These developments reveal a growing fragility in the operation of international branch campuses where global uncertainties and local market realities challenge the sustainability of such ventures. This risk should be an eye-opener for India, where clear contingency frameworks are yet to be outlined. One of the major gaps in current UGC regulations is the lack of a clear safety net for students, especially if a branch campus were to suddenly shut down.

Just what is a branch campus? Is it a full academic institution transplanted from one country to another, with a campus, a variety of offerings, perhaps some focus on research, facilities for student services, and the like? Or is it a floor of an office complex offering a few specialised degree programmes deemed to be attractive to target audiences and taught by local faculty or professors from the home university who fly in for a few weeks or perhaps teach only on Zoom?

Globally, there seem to be many more of the latter. Experts point out that building a "real" branch is expensive and time consuming. Most "real" branch campuses around the world have been financed by governments or in some cases by property developers. For example, the campus of New York University in Abu Dhabi was built using funds from the UAE.

Foreign universities are seldom willing to invest in actually building overseas campuses. So, it is worth asking whether the British universities will be making significant investments to build their branches in India or whether they simply intend to leverage local partnerships and facilities. There is also the question of teaching.
