Category: Editorial
Title: There are interstellar intruders in our Part One

There are interstellar intruders in our solar system. But are they aliens?

In our solar system. But are they aliens? ATLAS was deemed to move faster than Oumuamua or Borisov  -  other recent 'trespassers'  -  and was clearly unbound to the solar system A prowler alert has been sounded by astronomers. An object has arrived, it seems, from somewhere in interstellar space, outside the solar system.

It came closest to the Earth last December before swinging away in a different direction than it came from. A few astronomers have even raised an alarm that the object may actually be a spaceship controlled by aliens. Apparently, they have us earthlings in their crosshairs. And this is not the first time.

There have been three such sightings of interstellar intruders in the last five years. The internet has naturally exploded with memes of invading extra-terrestrials. The theme of infiltrators that dominates our collective psyche these days has thus acquired a deep space twist. The first trespasser was discovered in November 2017, when a set of telescopes in Hawaii designed to detect near-Earth objects found something unusual.

An object was moving way too fast to be kept a slave to the Sun's gravity and was seen in the wrong part of the sky. It was also on a path that was sharply inclined to the plane in which most objects in the solar system operate. After swinging around the Sun, it was flung out in a path that was unlike that of a typical orbiting comet.

It was heading towards somewhere outside the solar system, having come from deep interstellar space. Astronomers named it "Oumuamua", which in the Hawaiian language means "distant messenger". Its shape was also rather strange. Judging from the variation of its brightness with time as it tumbled through space, astronomers first thought Oumuamua had the shape of a long cigar, then concluded it was more like a pancake.

Its jerky movement was reminiscent of comets, which often get pushed by jets of vapour created by the heat of sunlight on icy comets. But Oumuamua didn't have a fuzzy halo around it as comets usually do. Astronomers surmised that it could be a cometary object from a distant planetary system, and had lost much of its gas during its long journey through interstellar space.

How long has it been hurtling through space? The fact that it was still bright made some astronomers hypothesise that Oumuamua was mostly made of nitrogen. Some objects at the edge of our own solar system, like Pluto, are nitrogenous. Maybe Oumuamua was a piece of one such peripheral icy object in a distant system, created in a collision and hurled into deep space as a result.

Theorists tried to estimate its age by considering the ill effects of dangerously energetic particles in space (cosmic rays) impinging on the object. According to them, Oumuamua was rather "young", having been catapulted from its star system not earlier than two billion years ago. Had it been moving in deep space for a longer time than this, it would have lost its nitrogen-bearing outer layer.

Some scientists thought otherwise. The probability of such a nitrogen-bearing object was too low, according to them. On the contrary, they claimed that Oumuamua's weird shape, movement, and trajectory could be explained if it was piloted by aliens. But there was no radio signal that astronomers could detect from it, as would have been expected in the case of its being a spaceship.
