Category: Editorial
Title: There are interstellar intruders in our Part Two

There are interstellar intruders in our solar system. But are they aliens?

Unfortunately, there was no time to gather more data as Oumuamua was already on its way out. Then, a Russian amateur astronomer, Gennadiy Borisov, discovered a second encroaching object in August 2019. It was also moving faster than objects bound within the solar system, and its trajectory clearly pointed towards its origin being in interstellar space.

"Borisov" was more or less spherical in shape, with a cometary halo around it, and astronomers gathered from the analysis of its light that although the object contained a rather large amount of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide, it did carry some water ice as well. The proportion was rare but not outright impossible for a comet-like object. During the Covid lockdown, in March and April 2020, astronomers took a peek at it with the Hubble Space Telescope and saw Borisov being fragmented, with a piece breaking off.

This is typical of comets, which are nothing but balls of ice. When sunlight falls on them, the ensuing heat often makes chunks of ice fall apart from the main body. The old discussion of aliens came back to haunt the scientific sphere after the discovery of the third object in July 2025. Dubbed "ATLAS" after the name of the array of telescopes with which it was spotted, it was deemed to move faster than Oumuamua or Borisov and clearly unbound to the solar system.

It went past the Earth on December 19  -  missing it by a whopping 270 million km, more than twice the distance between the Earth and Sun. In other words, ATLAS was "behind" the Sun during the closest encounter with the Earth. Next March, it is going to travel past Jupiter, before dashing out of the solar system.

Although it doesn't have the signature tail of a comet, it is surrounded by a comet-like glow. The spectrum of its light indicates that ATLAS has a larger amount of carbon dioxide compared to water than typical comets in our solar system do. It implies that ATLAS originated in a region of a distant planetary system where the temperature is lower than -200 degrees Celsius, where dry ice can dominate over water ice.

Its eerie greenish glow of ATLAS, due to the presence of nickel vapour, has been the subject of much animated discussions, although it is not unusual in the world of comets. What has, however, cranked up the rumours involving aliens is the sighting of a tail in a direction (towards the Sun) opposite to what is usually found in comets. The claim is that such "anti-tails" cannot but be the evidence of a spaceship doing some suspicious maneuvers.

But it turns out that such anti-tails are not impossible to explain in terms of natural phenomena, and have been occasionally sighted in comets. For most astronomers, though, such intruders from deep space allow them to study distant planetary systems without having to travel far. It gives them a chance to test the theories of comet formation, and the extent of variations in their compositions, as well as probe the environment outside our solar system.

These interstellar objects need not be a cause for alarm, but are rather welcome visitors for our better understanding of the cosmos. By Biman Nath The writer is Visiting Professor, IISER Mohali was earlier an astrophysicist at the Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru
