Category: Editorial
Title: This is Americas most pointless war yet Part Two

This is America's most pointless war yet

The most recent rationale, presented by US Secretary of State Marco Rubio, is an argument for self-defence so convoluted that he himself is unlikely to actually believe it: Israel was intent on launching a strike, to which Iran might have responded by striking American military bases in the Gulf of Arabia. And so the US decided to strike Iran before it could respond to an attack that had not yet happened. Of course, the easier option would have been for the US (Israel's main arms supplier) to have simply told its ally to forgo the gratuitous assault.

These and so many other unconvincing excuses do nothing to answer that fundamental question: Why? What is the cause for which American troops are being asked to risk their lives? The killing of an 86-year-old man, and nearly a thousand (so far) other Iranians? The destruction of a nuclear programme that doesn't exist, and missiles that can't even fly far enough to crash into the Atlantic Ocean?

Is any of that worth the billions of dollars already spent, and the hundreds of billions that will be wasted if the war keeps grinding on? As Gen David Petraeus, commander of US forces in Iraq, once demanded of his civilian bosses, "Tell me how this ends". There is an answer to the question of "why", but it's not a good one: Because Trump wants it.

That's the answer to most questions in American politics these days. Why have we slapped tariffs on every nation in the world? Why are armed thugs throwing nannies into prison warehouses? Why have we started an out-of-the-blue war against a nation of 90 million? It's always the same answer. Because for Trump, everything is a dominance play.

His entire life has been an exercise in satisfying his own ego, and his hunger to subordinate others just grows and grows the more he feeds it. Now he controls more raw power than anyone on the planet, and he's increasingly eager to use it. When the families of the seven American servicemembers killed so far, or of the 170-odd schoolgirls killed in Minab, ask "why", that's the only honest answer anyone could give them: To make Trump feel strong.

Written by: Jonah Blank The writer is author of Arrow of the Blue-Skinned God: Retracing the Ramayana Through India and Mullahs on the Mainframe: Islam and Modernity Among the Daudi Bohras
