Category: Editorial
Title: This is Americas most pointless war yet Part One

This is America's most pointless war yet

When the families of the seven American servicemembers killed so far, or of the 170-odd schoolgirls killed in Iran's Minab, ask "why," that's the only honest answer anyone could give them: To make Trump feel strong The order to send troops into battle is the gravest, most consequential decision any national leader can take. It is inevitably a death sentence: for one's own soldiers, for those of the enemy, and for all the civilians caught in the crossfire. The first question in any war is the most important one: Why?

Twelve days after launching the latest Middle East conflict, America's president doesn't seem even to have asked. The answer will determine whether the US/Israeli assault on Iran will turn out to be a brief fit of pointless destruction, or another generation-devouring disaster for the region, for America, and for the world. "War," said Carl von Clausewitz, "is the continuation of politics by other means." So what political goals are being advanced by the deluge of Tomahawk missiles and JDAM-guided bombs?

Donald Trump has offered an array of explanations, which change by the hour and with the mood. None of them makes the least bit of sense. Regime change? If so, we should expect an invasion and occupation that would make the Iraq War look like a schoolyard scuffle. Air strikes have never ousted a regime like Iran's, let alone put a successor in place.

Iran's theocracy suffered a decapitation strike with the killing of Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei on the first day, and yet there are no signs of the regime tumbling. In any case, the US administration swears that (as Secretary of Defence Pete Hegseth put it) "this is not a so-called regime-change war". Trump would be happy if a pro-American order arose by magic, but he's not doing anything to bring one about.

Destruction of Iran's nuclear capability? Eight months ago, after his prior bombing spree, Trump declared the program "obliterated". Iran never had the ability to field even one nuclear weapon, let alone an array that could threaten America. Tehran agreed to the most ironclad limits possible on its (legal and NPT-permissible) civilian nuclear programme, and Trump reneged on that deal in his first term.

Support for Iran's people, most of whom bitterly resent the clerical order? In early January, as millions clogged the streets of the capital and other cities, Trump assured them that "help is on the way". The regime cracked down brutally, killing thousands, and Trump took no action. Now, nearly two months later, he declared, "What we did in Venezuela, I think, is the perfect, the perfect scenario" for Iran.

That scenario, which unfolded at precisely the same time as the Iranian protests, consisted of the removal of the nation's president and no change whatsoever for the Venezuelan people. The leader of the popular movement, who had won the nation's last election, was granted a White House visit, where she gave Trump her Nobel Prize medallion as a gift, in return for nothing. The degradation of Iran's ballistic missile program?

This is a key war aim for Israel, which lies within the range of Iran's Shahab 3 missiles, and has been subjected to them in this and prior conflicts. There is no such threat, however, to even an inch of American territory, the closest bits of which lie 7,000 kilometres beyond the Shahab's reach. Trump has claimed that Iran is on the cusp of developing intercontinental ballistic missile capability, but his own intelligence agencies see no prospect of this happening for at least a decade (if ever).
