Category: Editorial
Title: Time is ripe for a pollution tax Part Two

Time is ripe for a pollution tax

This levy would be a direct tax and only affect profits and shareholders. It is, hence, a fair charge. A legitimate question could be on the possible allowances for companies involved in activities that improve the environment - common under corporate social responsibility spends. However, any allowance should be avoided as it can lead to tax arbitrage.

The idea is to tax the polluting activity - any mitigating factors should not be allowed to be used as an umbrella. The alternative approach can be through an indirect tax, where the levy is at the consumer end. Here, the end user pays tax on products classified under the three categories. Hence if petrol and diesel are taxed at 1/ litre, the cost is borne by the consumer.

There will be an incentive to shift to other forms to escape the tax. The government can earn a lot of revenue on just motor fuel. The1 tax can fetch 15,000 crore annually. Intuitively, any increase can lead to proportionately higher revenues for the government. Further, every air ticket can have a pollution tax that is part of the fare - a100 tax on 200 million passengers annually can fetch `2,000 crore.

The only consideration for the government, however, would be the inflation impact. Balancing inflation with revenue will be the main consideration, and it is not possible to cover all products and services at once. It must be done in phases. The suggestion is to impose the tax selectively on the most polluting products - fuel and power, fashion, livestock, transport, data centres, construction, plastics, and chemicals - with the tax being variable.

Another ideological issue is taxing pollution caused by farming and livestock, given that it falls under the unorganised sector. Exemptions will be required, given the sensitive nature of such products. Hence, in the first phase, the pollution tax could be imposed on specific industries and services that are less controversial and easy to administer.

A pollution tax can be a major alternative revenue stream for the government, and it can be harnessed gradually. It will bring in more consciousness within the society and help reduce overall levels of pollution in future. By Madan Sabnavis The writer is chief economist at the bank of Baroda.
