Title: On the new phase of the Khelo India Scheme
Category: Edotorial


one of the biggest impediments to India’s aspiration to bid for the 2036 Olympics is the
lack of enough world-class performers. For India, a prospective host, targeting a
prestigious top-10 finish is a humongous task. In the 21st century, the country achieved
its best-ever result of 48th with seven medals at the Tokyo Olympics in 2021 and was 71st
with six medals at Paris 2024. India needs to win approximately 30 to 40 medals, including
gold in double digits, to be in the elite club. To chase this Olympic dream, the Union Cabinet has
approved an allocation of ₹29,054 crore — an eight-fold increase — for the new phase of the Khelo India
Scheme. The primary goal of this ambitious grassroots programme is to tap talent early for the 2036
Olympics. It aims to increase Khelo India centres, State and National centres of excellence and
accredited academies from roughly one per district — more than 1,000 centres at present — to an
average of two or three. Involving schools and clubs, encouraging talented children to compete in clublevel events, upgrading facilities, and assimilating grassroot-coaches and technical officials are
essential ingredients of the wholesome scheme.
A novel concept of upgrading the knowledge of local coaches by helping them overcome the language
barrier posed by English, the formation of a National Coach Accreditation Board to standardise coaching
and better utilisation of physical education teachers are expected to impart correct training at the basic
level. In sync with the National Education Policy, the Khelo India Feeder Schools and Khelo India
Utkrishta Vidyalaya initiatives are designed to integrate education and sports. The existing Khelo India
Athletes programme, with 2,904 athletes, and the new Emerging Khelo India Athletes initiative aim to
expand the talent pool to around 28,000. Talent identification, digitisation of the sports ecosystem to
maintain data on every athlete, and a bottom-to-top communication channel are its key components. The
overall outlay, including assistance to National Sports Federations, stands at a staggering ₹36,441
crore for 2026-31. However, the biggest challenge will be effective and transparent implementation of
the scheme. Enabling talent to graduate to the highest level, already backed by the Target Olympic
Podium Scheme, with an eye on the 2036 Olympics and beyond will be crucial. The 2030
Commonwealth Games in Ahmedabad will be an immediate test. The other major hurdle for India’s
attempt to emerge as a sporting power is its dubious distinction as a doping hub. Strict anti-doping
measures, promotion of a sports culture by maximising the scope of the Fit India Movement, and a focus
on grassroots development must go hand-in-hand to achieve the desired results.
