Category: Editorial
Title: To build Delhis future learn from past

To build Delhi's future, learn from past missteps

The emphasis of Delhi's fourth Master Plan, notified last week, on expanding public transport, ecological restoration, redevelopment, affordable housing and mixed land use is welcome. About 25 years ago, when Delhi's third Master Plan came into effect, the city's population was about 14 million, Gurugram and Noida were fledgling suburbs, the first lines of the capital's Metro network were being laid, and a CNG policy for public transport had been introduced as a pollution-control measure. Since then, another 10 million people have made the capital their home, civic infrastructure of its neighbouring cities has come under acute stress, and the improvement in air quality that Delhi experienced for much of the 2000s and early 2010s has given way to an almost intractable pollution crisis.

Delhi's fourth Master Plan, notified last week, acknowledges these challenges. Its emphasis on expanding public transport, ecological restoration, redevelopment, affordable housing and mixed land use is welcome. One of the plan's strengths is its recognition that Delhi cannot be built simply by expanding outward.

With limited land available within the National Capital Territory, better utilisation of existing urban land will become more important. The proposed increase in housing supply, including an ambition of roughly 40 lakh additional homes by 2047 at affordable rates, and greater flexibility in development norms to permit higher densities is, therefore, significant. The plan also recognises the futility of rigidly demarcating residential and commercial areas.

If implemented well, these measures could ease the city's longstanding traffic congestion and improve air quality. Mixed land use, environment-friendly transport, the redevelopment and nurturing of green spaces, and greater attention to the city's water bodies could all contribute to improving Delhi's ecological health and enhance the well-being of its residents. None of these ideas will succeed, however, without confronting the national capital's most persistent governance problems: Municipal inertia and a lack of alignment among civic agencies, Centre and Delhi government.

These deficits were the biggest bottleneck in realising the previous Master Plan's vision of a more sustainable city. Over the past 25 years, research on pollution, Yamuna restoration, waste management, urban flooding and transport development has pointed to the need for concerted action among departments. Metro expansion, for instance, works best when bus routes, last-mile connectivity, parking rules and pedestrian facilities are designed around it.

Land-use planning and infrastructure development cannot be divorced from the requirements of curbing water logging, while building approvals, fire safety and emergency response require effective information-sharing among construction, fire and municipal authorities. Repeated fire incidents, building collapses and the strain placed on the city's infrastructure during heavy rainfall have exposed the risks of fragmented and overlapping responsibilities among its agencies. Delhi has a blueprint for improving liveability.

It needs to learn from past failures.
