Category: Editorial
Title: To ensure food security amid war clouds Part One

To ensure food security amid war clouds, goverment must reform fertiliser policy

War clouds, goverment must reform fertiliser policy The government needs to reform its fertiliser policies, either through the DBT route or by rationing quantities. Only then can it reduce its misuse and diversion, and ensure food security The world heaved a sigh of relief as a two-week ceasefire was announced by US President Donald Trump, just hours before his deadline, and after the threat that "A whole civilisation will die tonight, never to be brought back again". One can only hope that there is a lasting solution to the deadly conflict between Iran and the US-Israel, and civilians are spared from death and destruction.

What is the lesson for India from this conflict, as well as the one between Russia and Ukraine? The world is heading towards greater uncertainty and instability. Against this backdrop, the first and foremost task for the Indian government is to ensure food security for its people. But food security cannot be achieved unless India secures its fertiliser supplies.

Natural farming, though desirable as a niche market, cannot feed India. India's import dependence for chemical fertilisers (including their feedstocks) is to the tune of 70 per cent. Take the case of urea. India consumes roughly 40 million tonnes (MT) of urea, of which about 10MT is imported. But even what is produced at home is dependent on imported gas to the tune of almost 85 per cent.

In the 40 days of the war, global urea prices were up by almost 65 per cent, from $482/tonne at the end of February to $795/tonne in the first week of April. Similarly, gas prices (Liquefied Natural Gas) went up from $12/MMBtu to $19.5/MMBtu over the same period, an increase of 63 per cent. This is the biggest hit to India, on top of not getting enough supplies from the Strait of Hormuz.

Realising this, the Cabinet has already approved a higher subsidy on urea, indicating that the price of urea may not be increased for the farmers. Even prices of phosphatic fertilisers are increasing, although not to the same extent as urea and LNG. The price of DAP, for example, has gone up from $627/tonne to $720/tonne, an increase of about 15 per cent.

But getting DAP or phosphate rock or phosphoric acid from the Gulf countries, especially Saudi Arabia, is becoming increasingly difficult. What should Indian policy-makers do? Minister of Chemicals and Fertilisers J P Nadda is on record saying that we know a farmer needs two bags of urea for his crop, but is taking four bags.

This clearly indicates that the government is aware that there is overuse of urea in relation to phosphatic and potassic fertilisers, and/or there is significant diversion of urea for non-agricultural uses or even to neighbouring countries. Given that urea in the country is being sold at less than $70/tonne to the farmers when global prices are touching almost $795/tonne, it leads to very inefficient use and opens up opportunities for large arbitrage in diversion. Why can't the government say to each state that, given the difficulty in procuring gas and urea, and a major increase in their import prices, there will be a cut of 10 to 15 per cent in the supplies of urea for each state?
