Category: Editorial
Title: To ensure food security amid war clouds Part Two

To ensure food security amid war clouds, goverment must reform fertiliser policy

And then ask the states to work out the modalities of how they want to allocate these restricted supplies to farmers based on their land records, crops grown, previous sales, and  recommended doses by their state agriculture universities. This quantitative rationing of urea under the Essential Commodities Act is very much possible and desirable to ensure better usage of nitrogenous fertilisers. This exercise needs to be undertaken jointly by the Centre and the states.

It may be noted that granular urea, the way it is being applied in India, has a very low Nutrient Use Efficiency (NUE), roughly 35 to 40 per cent. The plant does not consume more than 40 per cent of the nitrogen being applied. The rest is going into the environment as nitrous oxide, which is 273 times the carbon dioxide, or leaching into groundwater and increasing its nitrate content that causes blue baby syndrome, thyroid or even diabetes.

It is ironic that liquid urea (N) is not subsidised, whose NUE is almost 90 per cent through drip irrigation (fertigation). This speaks of a highly irrational urea pricing policy. The Prime Minister's efforts to promote natural farming can not really scale up unless fertiliser pricing or quantities are rationalised.

Minister for Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare Shivraj Singh Chouhan says that they would like to do direct cash transfers to farmers equivalent to the fertiliser subsidy. But when will this happen? And how will they resolve the issue of tenants? The PM-KISAN scheme suffers from this lacuna, and the most vulnerable section of peasantry, the tenants, remains outside this scheme.

How about clubbing the PM-KISAN funds and the fertiliser subsidy and directly giving it to farmers (land owners and tenants) on a per-acre basis, and freeing up prices of fertilisers? It can be done and would be most desirable. But it needs due preparation to identify real cultivators. The PM needs to put this issue on high priority as the gains would be very significant.

DAP supplies are another issue. If India is already using urea (N) in excess in relation to P and K fertilisers, why put 18 per cent N even in DAP with 46 per cent P? Why not simply use Triple Super Phosphate (TSP) with 46 per cent P? We have no plant in the country producing TSP, but we have more than 100 plants producing Single Super Phosphate (SSP) with only 16 per cent P.

Why not incentivise the production of TSP at home or in collaboration with phosphatic-rich countries? The bottom line is that we need to increase the consumption of P in relation to N, and the best product for that would be TSP in place of DAP. It will also help the government to save at least 18 per cent N, and also cut down the subsidy bill on urea (N).

The government needs to reform its fertiliser policies, either through the DBT route or by rationing quantities. Only then can it reduce its misuse and diversion, and ensure food security. Written by: Ashok Gulati Gulati is Distinguished Professor at ICRIER. Views are personal
