Category: Editorial
Title: Tourism and trade On the Great Nicobar

Tourism and trade: On the Great Nicobar mega-infrastructure project

Mega-infrastructure project Consensus is vital in leveraging the strategic importance of Nicobar The Union government's ₹92,000 crore mega-infrastructure project for the holistic development of the Great Nicobar Island (GNI) by building it up as a port and tourism-led economy has gathered speed in the last six months, even as concerns remain about its impact on the Island's ecology and the rights of local populations, the Nicobarese and the Shompen - two indigenous tribal groups. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands administration has notified a draft master plan for the project. Apart from the International Container Transhipment Port (ICTP), the airport, and power plants, the draft master plan envisions developing the GNI as a "seaside destination in a pristine, unspoilt, protected environment", outlining plans for business, adventure, biodiversity tourism, family entertainment, amusement parks, etc., along with adequate social infrastructure for healthcare, education, and livelihood.

The draft is planned for a projected population of over 3.36 lakh by 2055, by which time the expected tourist inflow will be a million a year. Over 70% of the direct employment the government hopes to create will be in tourism and allied sectors. The current population of the GNI is a little less than 10,000.

This transformation of the GNI, aided by the ICTP, is crucial to leverage the "strategic importance" of the Island's location at the western entrance to the Malacca Strait. The draft plan has said the port will help India achieve its "aims to capture a significant share in global sea trade". But while the administration has sought public suggestions and objections for 30 days, it remains unclear till when this window will remain open, given that the draft does not mention when it was notified.

This draft plan follows another draft plan to relocate local Nicobarese communities to make way for the project. The two plans seemingly contradict each other with regard to where existing populations may be relocated, which has renewed fears among these groups. These communities have been opposing the project's clearance since 2022, alleging that their forest rights had not been settled.

While the National Green Tribunal has set aside concerns about the project's impact on the GNI's biodiversity by citing its "strategic importance", a challenge to the project's clearances remains in the Calcutta High Court. Some have also questioned the project's commercial and naval merits. Considering that the project aims to irreversibly alter the demography, and ecology of the GNI, the most prudent path for the government is to take the time needed to build a more holistic consensus over it.
