Category: Editorial
Title: Toward financing industry Part Two

Toward financing industry

Modelled along the lines of the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development (NaBFID) established in 2021, as a specialised DFI under the Reserve Bank of India's supervision, it could be named the National Industrial Development Bank of India (NIDBI). NIDBI could support industrialisation by addressing gaps in the current industrial financing system in alignment with national priorities. It should be a well-capitalised, professionally managed institution dedicated to supporting manufacturing investments through lending programmes and technical advisory services.

NIDBI's authorised capital could be `1 lakh crore, of which 20% or `20,000 crore could be paid-up initially, contributed by the government, domestic long-term institutional investors, and multilateral financial institutions. Its shareholder profile would allow it to leverage several times its paid-up capital, through bond issuance in both domestic and overseas markets or credit lines from multilateral institutions. NIDBI could prioritise manufacturing projects under Make in India for its lending programmes in tune with national priorities, focusing on sectors and projects that address market failures or create new opportunities, such as socially relevant and ecologically sustainable initiatives.

Potential projects could include green hydrogen, solar panel manufacturing, wind turbines, electric vehicles (EV), EV batteries, semiconductor making, among other projects, besides job-creating value chains. NIDBI should develop specialised expertise in project appraisal, risk management, and impact assessment while remaining responsive to global trends. A robust project appraisal and risk management system, along with transparent and sound corporate governance, would be essential for NIDBI.

As a catalyst for manufacturing development, NIDBI should provide advisory services to investors, design structured term loan facilities tailored to project needs, and issue guarantees or letters of credit as required. It would also monitor global trends and adjust its strategies to align with national requirements. To sum up, carrying forward the strong momentum built over the past decade to foster the manufacturing sector, the finance minister could give a further push by plugging an important gap in the institutional architecture by creating a new DFI in her next Budget.

By Nagesh Kumar & Santosh Das, respectively Director and Assistant Professor, Institute for Studies in Industrial Development Views are personal
