Category: Editorial
Title: Tracing PSBs pivotal role in socioeconomic Part Two

Tracing PSBs' pivotal role in socioeconomic uplift

Corresponding growth in deposits reached ₹2.3 trillion, and advances reached ₹1.25 trillion. Bank reforms During the post-nationalisation banking phase, the direction of growth could successfully democratise credit flow to lower strata of society and mobilise massive national savings, but in the process eroded profitability and began to accumulate a high proportion of non-performing assets (NPAs). This set the stage for the 1991 Narasimham Committee reforms, which marked the true "liberalisation" of banking  -  shifting the RBI's role from a rigid administrative allocator of branches and credit to prudential supervision and granting banks operational autonomy to open branches based on commercial viability.

Era of consolidation When PSBs were calibrating internal operational structure to balance bank reforms with continued thrust on socioeconomic transformation by integrating interoperable core banking technology to provide anywhere/anytime banking competing with their new generation private peers, they had to undergo intense phase of consolidation reducing the number of PSBs from 27 in March 2017 to 12 by March 2021 to achieve economies of scale and enhance operational efficiency. Even amid tectonic multiple challenges, PSBs maintained steadfast focus to leverage technology to develop a strong base of alternative delivery channels, expanding the network of ATMs, Micro ATMs, POS terminals, digital wallets, internet banking, mobile apps, and digital lending apps to provide digital banking services. Despite the entry of new-generation banks, differentiated banks, stronger RRBs, and NBFCs, PSBs continue to hold 59 per cent of banking assets, 58.5 per cent of deposits, and 54.5 per cent of advances.

Out of 1,60,000 bank branches, PSBs account for 62 per cent. Their share in rural and semi-urban bank branches is higher, at 72 per cent and 62 per cent, respectively. The kind of business process re-engineering undertaken by PSBs to expand digital banking services by exploring the Jandhan, Aadhaar, and Mobile (JAM) trinity and digital public infrastructure (DPI) demonstrates their change management acumen and an unwavering commitment to striking a balance between socioeconomic banking and stakeholder protection.

Nationalisation of banks might be a good move, but kudos to PSBs for meeting intended objectives in the letter and spirit alleviating poverty at the bottom of the pyramid. PSBs are thus well-poised to potentially become effective economic change agents to realise the goals set under Viksit Bharat-2047 if policy support and inclusive stakeholder participation are extended. By K Srinivasa Rao The writer is Adjunct Professor, Institute of Insurance and Risk Management, Hyderabad.

Views are personal
