Category: Editorial
Title: Trading charges

Trading charges

India should call out US' 'transshipment scam' report Last week, the Trump administration brought out a report called 'The Great Transshipment Scam', which implicates India as one of the 40 countries which simply re-route Chinese goods to the US and helps China duck punitive US tariffs. Of the 40 blacklisted countries and blocs, India has been put down in Tier-1 category of worst offenders in volume-terms, alongside the EU, Canada, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Israel and Mexico. The report, in a nutshell, is alleging large scale violation of rules of origin (ROO).

But the report cites no evidence to show that India has violated ROO, or transshipped goods without value addition. It has cited a specific instance of pumps and compressors exported from the Pune-Gujarat-Chennai region. Analysts have, however, pointed out that there is considerable industrial capacity here.

Export volumes of pumps to the US and rest of the world exceed imports from China, suggesting value addition. In the case of compressors, there seems to be domestic absorption of imports. India should urge the US to disclose country, product and shipment details of 'illegal transshipment'. According to the US Commerce Department, "$67 billion in US-bound goods were transshipped from China through the top hubs  -  Mexico, India, and Vietnam -  in 2025, producing an estimated $28 billion in lost tariff revenue".

It is not known what India's share in this amount is. The Commerce Department says that imports from China fell by roughly $109 billion in 2025, while imports from other countries rose by roughly $156 billion. The report cites these two trends  -  that China's share in US exports fell from 20 per cent in 2018 to 10 per cent in 2024, while that of the 40 countries mentioned in the report rose from 70 per cent to 80 per cent  -  to conclude that China is routing goods through the latter.

This is unconvincing, as there could have been value addition. Besides, if China's goods are entering the US despite the best efforts to stop them, it signals a failure of Trump's tariff offensive (which actually began in 2018 against China) to shore up US manufacturing. The Trump administration cannot easily explain a tariff policy that has not curbed overall imports or enhanced US production.

It is now looking for global scapegoats. The report could be a precursor to another round of tariffs under Section 301 and Section 232. India has no reason to be perturbed. It has not been hugely impacted by US tariffs so far, which were at 50 per cent levels between August 2025 and February 2026. Exports to the US, as to the rest of the world have been flat in FY26  -  also because about 40 per cent of India's exports to the US are outside the punitive tariffs list.

This scenario is unlikely to change even if new tariffs are introduced, because the US cannot perhaps risk supply and price shocks in important products. A knee-jerk response to US' moves or statements is best avoided. India should counter this report factually. However, it must also look into the growing import intensity of its exports.
