Category: Editorial
Title: Transferring equity to coastal communities Part Two

Transferring equity to coastal communities

ABS serves to reconcile the jurisdictional void between physical offshore extraction and onshore genetic synthesis. India's shift towards marine ABS is not isolated but an alignment with global precedents set by Australia and Norway with 'Two-Permit approach' and '2009 Marine Bioprospecting Strategy' respectively. The Kerala State Biodiversity Board (SBB) took the lead in January 2026 with a workshop on marine ABS levies working out with west coast States to standardise conditions.

The future roadmap should include integrating SBB's data through the SWIFT mechanism, linking directly with MPEDA (Marine Products Export Development Authority) and the Customs' Icegate system. This ensures that ABS compliance is not a manual bottleneck but a digital, seamless part of the export workflow. To ensure practical application, the AP SBB intends to work in close coordination with the National Biodiversity Authority's (NBA's) Expert Committee on Aquatic Genetic Resources.

The eastern corridor The potential is proven in the eastern corridor. Last fiscal year, India's seafood exports reached a historic ₹62,408 crore, with Andhra Pradesh contributing over 60 per cent. The 2023 BD Act allows the NBA to remove a species from the NTC (Normally Traded Commodities) list to ensure it is subject to ABS.

By focusing on large industrial processors with annual turnovers exceeding ₹5 crore, with a focus on premium wild-caught species, we can generate significant revenue for coastal BMCs. If even 10 per cent of this high-value catch moves into an ABS model, the resulting funds could generate critical revenue for basic infrastructure helping small scale fishermen. There may be concerns that ABS acts as a new cess or a burden on an industry already dealing with thin margins.

To give clarity, it's a statutory levy for the sake of profit-sharing of an economic surplus. The small-scale and individual traditional fishermen are entirely excluded from ABS. The financial responsibility falls solely on the large export houses and industrial processors. Inland fishing and shrimp cultivation (like Vannamei) are not subject to ABS levies, because it falls under Section 40 of NTC under the 2023 Act and is treated as cultivated/farmed rather than wild biological resources, ensuring aquaculture dominance remains unchallenged.

The AP State Biodiversity Board is planning to initiate a State-specific committee comprising marine biologists, aqua farmers, business houses and regulators, to ensure that every rupee collected is tracked and returned to the specific coastal community it came from. . The biological resources within our maritime zones, stretching from complex cephalopods to the high growth seaweed industry, are not just commodities; but a strategic national resource.

By operationalising the 2023 BD Act, the framework creates a mechanism for industrial profit-sharing ensuring that the equity from marine exports flows directly to the BMCs. By Neelayapalem Vijay Kumar The writer is Chairman, Andhra Pradesh Bio-Diversity Board
