Category: Editorial
Title: Trumps Iran sanctions have a China problem Part One

Trump's Iran sanctions have a China problem

Large Chinese banks have too much to lose if they are cut off from the dollar system. But US leverage weakens as transactions move to smaller banks with fewer ties to the US and Western financial markets In late August, US Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent declared an "economic D- Day" against Iran, promising "the single greatest financial offensive ever marshaled against an adversary." The D-Day analogy is an odd one for a campaign whose success ultimately depends on China, an American ally at Normandy but a strategic rival today. For the Trump administration's "zero-leakage" policy to succeed, foreign financial institutions would need to monitor and police their own customers.

And there is no way to achieve the "total isolation" of the Iranian regime without Chinese banks doing much of the hard work of sanctions enforcement. Before the closure of the Strait of Hormuz, the US Treasury estimated that China purchased roughly 90 per cent of Iran's oil exports. Years of sanctions have already pushed much of the Iranian oil trade into an alternative system capable of operating without the dollar, the SWIFT interbank payments platform, and the correspondent banks that have long given the United States its financial leverage.

Much of this trade moves through Iran's rahbar shadow-banking system, which according to the Treasury processes "tens of billions of dollars" worth of trade each year, "much of it derived from Iran's overseas sales of oil and petrochemicals." Today, Iran settles those sales primarily in renminbi. Secondary US sanctions have previously changed the behaviour of major Chinese banks even when China officially rejected them. Within the first week of Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, for example, the offshore units of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) stopped issuing dollar-denominated letters of credit for purchases of physical Russian commodities.

Renminbi-denominated credit lines remained available for some customers but required senior management approval. The Bank of China (BOC) restricted financing for Russian commodities, while its Singapore branch went even further and ceased financing transactions involving Russian companies and oil. America's Sanctions Blind Spot But China's largest banks  -  its policy banks and the "big four" state-owned commercial banks, the ICBC, the BOC, the China Construction Bank, and the Agricultural Bank of China  -  are not America's hardest enforcement problem.

Their global operations require them to maintain access to dollar liquidity and correspondent banking relationships, which are far more valuable than any business with sanctioned Iranian entities. This dependence on the global dollar system gives them powerful incentives to limit their exposure to US sanctions. As former Treasury Secretary Janet L.

Yellen observed, China's large banks "are not banks that we most need to worry about" as they "really, really value their correspondent-banking relations." The greater challenge lies deeper within the Chinese financial system, among thousands of smaller regional banks with far less exposure to the dollar-based system and therefore less to lose if that access is cut off. In 2023, the People's Bank of China counted more than 3,800 urban and rural banks and credit cooperatives, in addition to private banks and other institutions. In 2024, as the US threatened Chinese banks with secondary sanctions, Russian companies increasingly turned to smaller regional institutions with minimal ties to Western markets.
