Category: Editorial
Title: Trumps Iran sanctions have a China problem Part Four

Trump's Iran sanctions have a China problem

China's largest financial institutions depend heavily on access to dollars. The US has far less leverage over smaller and less systemically important firms. This asymmetry makes an escalating spiral of US sanctions and Chinese countermeasures less likely. The problem for the Trump administration is what happens as more transactions move beyond the institutions and payment channels most exposed to US pressure.

At that point, effective enforcement increasingly requires cooperation from Chinese banks over which the US government has no authority. A growing renminbi-based financial system does not make US sanctions ineffective, at least while major Chinese banks remain dependent on the global dollar-based system. But when non-dollar payments are routed through shadow intermediaries, they erode the two critical enforcement advantages on which US financial sanctions have traditionally relied: the visibility of transactions and leverage over the institutions that process them.

While the dollar system gives the US enormous financial power, American officials can no longer assume that the threat of being excluded from it will be enough to make foreign institutions comply with their dictates. As more of the actual enforcement takes place inside China's domestic financial system, beyond the reach of American authorities, China may gain a new source of geopolitical leverage. Expecting China to enforce US sanctions is unrealistic, but anti-money-laundering enforcement offers a more practical basis for cooperation.

As US and Chinese officials discuss Iran and its financial ties to China ahead of Trump's planned summit with Chinese President Xi Jinping in Washington, the US would have better luck pressing China to enforce its own anti-money-laundering rules against the opaque financial networks facilitating Iranian trade. By Zongyuan Zoe Liu The writer is Senior Fellow for China Studies at the Council on Foreign Relations, is Adjunct Professor of International and Public Affairs at Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs.
