Category: Editorial
Title: Understanding Chinas Iran strategy and why Part Two

Understanding China's Iran strategy  -  and why China has stayed away from war in West Asia

It would therefore be reasonable to conclude that Beijing will retain influence in any post-war political environment in Iran. Economic and energy security interests with the Gulf countries are another factor shaping China's response to the Iran war. China overtook the West as the Gulf countries' largest trading partner, with a record trade volume of $257 billion in 2024.

It is also expected that two-sided trade will touch $375 billion by 2028. China also imports one-third of its LNG from this region. Compared with the $24 billion in trade between China and Israel, Sino-Iranian bilateral trade totaled just $13 billion in 2024. Beijing has also felt frustrated by the lack of substantive progress on several infrastructure and energy projects, due to Tehran's concerns that China's deepening footprint in strategically critical sectors of Iran will undermine its sovereignty.

China recognises the strategic advantage of the US becoming deeply engaged in the Middle East. A prolonged conflict can impose high financial and military costs on Washington while diverting its attention away from the Indo-Pacific. It will also enable the Xi Jinping government to enhance its military capabilities and expand its influence in the region.

Mindful of the adverse impact of a complete blockage of the Strait of Hormuz  - the main transit route for oil and gas tankers in West Asia  -  on its energy security, China has around 120 days of strategic oil and gas reserves and diversified its energy sources to meet any unforeseen energy crisis. Since China is the major importer of Iranian oil, it is also necessary for Tehran to ensure safe passage for Chinese energy ships through the Strait of Hormuz to sustain its economy and counter the US. At the same time, disruption to oil and gas shipments will also trigger a global energy crisis, forcing immediate, strong global intervention to end the war.

Chinese experts believe this situation will give Beijing a mediating role in bringing the two sides to the negotiating table. It thus becomes clear that China's decision to stay out of the war is a calibrated move to protect its core national interests. It will be interesting to see how long China can afford to be on the sidelines in a highly contested global order.

Written by Sumit Kumar The writer is Ministry of Foreign Affairs Visiting Fellow, National Chengchi University, Taipei and assistant professor, Department of Political Science, University of Delhi
