Category: Editorial
Title: Understanding Chinas Iran strategy and why Part One

Understanding China's Iran strategy  -  and why China has stayed away from war in West Asia

Strategy  -  and why China has stayed away from war in West Asia With the latest killing of Iran's security chief, Ali Larijani, a prolonged conflict can impose high financial and military costs on Washington while diverting its attention away from the Indo-Pacific. It will also enable the Xi Jinping government to enhance its military capabilities The US-Israel military strikes against Iran have triggered one of the worst phases of insecurity, disorder, and human suffering in West Asia in the 21st century. With the latest killing  -  Iran's security chief Ali Larijani  -  it is apparent that there is no immediate end to the war in sight.

Coupled with a looming global oil crisis, countries across continents are cautiously responding to the evolving situation in the region. Surprisingly, China, too, has pursued the policy of maintaining a strategic distance from the Iran war. In this context, it is worth recalling that, over the years, China-Iran ties have undergone a profound change, with the two sides expanding their areas of cooperation in defence, energy, telecommunications, surveillance, and other fields.

The signing of a 25-year strategic cooperation agreement worth $400 billion in 2021 further solidified the relationship. The underlying factors shaping China's strategy towards Iran have been threefold: First, China views Iran as a strategic asset in its effort to end US dominance in the West Asia; second, it wants to ensure a continuous, highly discounted Iranian oil supply; third, given its strategic location, Iran serves as a gateway for connecting China to Turkey and the European Union via Central Asia. Yet, these interests have not proved to be compelling grounds for China to provide Iran with military assistance in the war against the US-Israel alliance.

Consequently, China's diplomatically forceful statements have been viewed by some international relations scholars as Beijing's balancing act between the two sides, while other experts, especially Americans, hastily concluded that China lacks the will and prowess to challenge the US militarily. Unfortunately, both assessments lack an objective analysis as China's policy towards the Iran war needs to be examined within the broader framework of its core foreign policy priorities. One such priority for the Xi Jinping government is the unification of Taiwan with China.

With Taiwan's efforts to assert its independence at an all-time high, strengthening China's dominance in East Asia remains of greater importance than wasting its resources and time by getting involved in the Iran war. At the same time, the capture of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro by American forces and the US-Israel attack on Iran are being viewed as a classic case study for the Chinese strategic community to understand the US military's prowess that could frustrate China's attempt at a successful military operation against Taiwan. Beijing also does not wish to invite the mobilisation of American forces in its backyard, with its unswerving military support to Iran.

Interestingly, encouraged by the US administration's reported delay in multibillion-dollar arms sales to Taiwan, China reduced its military aircraft flights and drone operations around Taiwan in February ahead of a potential meeting between Donald Trump and Xi Jinping in late March. While China has been Iran's largest trading partner, accounting for about 30 per cent of its total trade, the current conflict with the US would further deepen Iran's dependence on China for economic and security support. China's support is also crucial for Iran at regional and global forums, including the SCO, BRICS, the Security Council, and others.
