Category: Editorial
Title: Unhealthy situation

Unhealthy situation

Private healthcare needs better regulation The 176th Parliamentary panel report on health and hospitals comprehensively points out the ways in which patients suffer a bad deal. They are faced with twin crises of access and affordability, because public health facilities are inadequate in relation to the demand for them, while private care at the secondary and tertiary levels is concentrated in the southern States and large cities and is 10 times as expensive. The private sector caters to over 60 per cent of inpatient and 70 per cent of outpatient care, and its service quality and price are largely unregulated in practice.

The report flags these rather well-known facts, but the challenge lies in ensuring that solutions are implemented. There are three broad domains to be looked into. These pertain to regulating hospitals in terms of providing good healthcare at reasonable prices; ensuring that the insurance system works for most; and raising budgetary outlays on health to ensure access and affordability.

On the first, the House panel rightly says that hospitals should display their 'schedule of charges' and create a national body to implement a cap on procedures and diagnostics. A standardised treatment protocol too would empower patients. The suggestion that hospitals should set aside 20 per cent of their beds for free treatment for the tax cuts and subsidies they get has been established even in court, but has simply not been implemented.

Similarly, a national health regulator has not been effective. Amidst this regulatory tardiness, corporate hospitals have prospered. The top three corporate hospitals have seen their EBITDA margins grow from 9.3 per cent in FY19 to 19.4 per cent in FY26. Accreditation for hospitals, that ensures minimum standards, is at present voluntary.

The report calls for a mandatory framework making the accreditation body NABH's system transparent and friendly even to the small health establishments. The Clinical Establishments Act needs to be evenly implemented. A report by this newspaper cites a few reputed hospitals having a cost accounting department.

Meanwhile, the panel report rightly notes the importance of pooling medicine procurement. On insurance, the panel report observes that while insurance coverage is 46 per cent, out-of-pocket expenditure per episode is over ₹34,000 on average, a data point that at once indicates that insurance does not cover costs adequately, and that the latter are extremely high. However, the report could have gone further than merely urge the insurance regulator to look into these issues, and suggest modifications in Ayushman Bharat, a successful measure that however needs to hook in private players by raising its reimbursement rates.

Insurance claim denials are a huge concern. Meanwhile, the report's suggestion to raise public health spending to 5 per cent of GDP (less than 2 per cent now) is unexceptionable, as public health facilities alone can guarantee both quality and universal coverage.
