Category: Editorial
Title: Unsafe practices On the Vietnam boat accident

Unsafe practices: On the Vietnam boat accident

Safety protocols should not be given short shrift in tourism and adventure Survivor accounts of the Vietnam boat tragedy last week point to two clearly identifiable contributors. As the weather turned rough and the speedboat took a sharp turn, it tilted to the left. The passengers - all Indian tourists - sitting on the right fell to the left side.

Almost all the passenger weight shifted at once, the boat lost balance and turned turtle. As it capsized, the boat captain and guide escaped through the open front door. Others who found an opening also jumped out. Those who could not leave were trapped inside the capsized boat and took in water. Rescuers pulled them ashore where first aid and resuscitation were attempted before they were moved to hospital.

All this took precious time and casualties mounted as a result. Some 15 Indians are reported to have died while 17 survived. Four Vietnamese crew also survived. The Indians on the speedboat at Phú Quôc were among more than 100 employees that a mobile company had taken to Vietnam on a corporate incentive tour.

Industry data indicate that some three crore Indians visit foreign countries every year, with a significant proportion of them coming from non-metro cities. Many of the survivors at Phú Quôc were from such cities. South-East Asia has emerged as the preferred destination, with Thailand and Vietnam joining the traditional attractions of Singapore and Malaysia.

Many of these new tourist spots are developing rapidly but, like India, have not fully strengthened safety-of-life practices. For instance, just as in India, pleasure boats operators may carry enough life jackets or distribute them but often do not insist that every passenger wears one. Life jackets keep people afloat with their heads above water if they end up in the sea.

In Phú Quôc, passengers were reportedly given life jackets, but it is not yet confirmed whether they were all made to wear them before departure. Another basic safety feature should be ensuring that passengers remain securely strapped to their seats so that they do not shift during rough weather or sharp manoeuvres. Even small shifts in passenger weight can significantly affect the stability of a speedboat.

This norm was violated in Phú Quôc. Vietnam in particular has witnessed a surge in tourism, with Indians forming a substantial share of visitors. Speedboat rides between the islets of the Phú Quôc archipelago and the main island are especially popular among Indian tourists. The Vietnamese government has promised to review safety standards on such boats and upgrade them where necessary.

But Indians, aided by governments and operators, must strengthen their awareness of safety practices, especially those related to fire and water safety.
