Category: Editorial
Title: US Russian crude waiver expires What it Part Two

US Russian crude waiver expires: What it could mean for India's oil imports from Russia

That is because Indian refiners were able to take deliveries of Russian oil on sanctioned tankers and could deal directly with US-sanctioned Russian companies, like Rosneft and Lukoil. Moreover, it temporarily removed any friction between Washington and New Delhi over the latter's hefty purchases of Moscow's crude. For India, the Russian oil waiver allowed for a fast ramp-up of imports of Moscow's oil amid the major disruption in supplies from West Asia.

Indian refiners were also able to secure some cargoes of Iranian oil, marking the first deliveries of Tehran's crude to India in nearly seven years, although the volumes were insignificant when compared to imports of Russian crude. Around 2.5 - 2.7 million barrels per day (bpd) of India's crude imports - accounting for around half of the country's total oil imports - have transited the Strait of Hormuz in recent months; the longer-term average is around 40%. Most of that supply is effectively offline due to the war.

While India was buying significant volumes of Russian crude even before the West Asia war began, the quantity had reduced notably over the past few months, evidently due to the US imposing sanctions on Russian oil majors Rosneft and Lukoil, and amid trade pact negotiations with Washington. The US made a meaningful reduction in India's Russian oil imports a prerequisite for scrapping its 25% additional penal tariff on New Delhi. In February, India had imported just over 1 million bpd of Russian crude, almost half of the 2025 peak of over 2 million bpd.

Even with the significant reduction in volumes, Russia was India's largest source of crude in February, accounting for about a fifth of its total oil imports. Then, with the war in West Asia raging and the sanctions waiver in place, India's Russian oil imports nearly doubled to 2 million bpd in March, accounting for a whopping 44.4% of India's total oil imports for the month even as imports from West Asia crashed, according to tanker data from commodity market analytics firm Kpler. In the first two weeks of April, India's Russian oil imports averaged 1.6 million bpd.

Foreseeable future of India's Russian oil imports With the waiver now gone, there could be some adjustments and downward pressure on oil imports from Russia, even as Moscow is likely to remain India's largest source of crude oil in the coming months, according to industry insiders and experts. For India, which is the world's third-largest consumer of crude oil and depends on imports to meet over 88% of its requirement, there aren't any major alternatives to West Asian oil - in scale, quality, and pricing - apart from Russia in a market that continues to grapple with geopolitical uncertainty. "The adjustment is more likely to be operational rather than structural - with refiners leaning toward near-term loaded barrels and avoiding directly sanctioned entities, rather than stepping away from Russian crude altogether," said Sumit Ritolia, manager, modelling & refining at Kpler.

"It's difficult to see India materially stepping back from Russian barrels. The decision isn't just about sanctions optics any more; it's about supply security and economics in a much more fragile system. With continued geopolitical uncertainty and the situation around the Strait of Hormuz still far from normal (restricted transits, higher risk, slower flows), Middle East barrels are not as straightforward as they used to be.
