Category: Editorial
Title: US Russian crude waiver expires What it Part One

US Russian crude waiver expires: What it could mean for India's oil imports from Russia

What it could mean for India's oil imports from Russia While these short-term waivers, particularly the one pertaining to Russian barrels already loaded on tankers, helped bring more oil to the market, their impact on international oil prices is not so clear as prices have remained elevated since early March The US has allowed the one-month sanctions waiver on buying Russian oil already on the water to expire, and will not be extending it, US Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent said in a press briefing in Washington. Bessent's comments pertaining to the waiver, which expired on April 11, came close on the heels of the US Department of the Treasury announcing that a similar sanctions waiver issued for Iranian oil won't be extended beyond its expiration date of April 19. "We will not be renewing the general license (sanctions waiver) on Russian oil, and we will not be renewing the general license on Iranian oil.

That was oil that was on the water prior to March 11. So all that has been used," Bessent said at a White House briefing early Thursday India time. With global oil supplies squeezed due to the effective halt in vessel movements through the Strait of Hormuz amid the West Asia war, these waivers aimed to allow more barrels of oil to reach the international market, thereby easing the supply situation and exerting downward pressure on spiralling oil prices.

Experts saw these moves from Washington as part of President Donald Trump's effort to prevent a further and sustained spike in international oil prices - and the consequent rise in domestic fuel prices in the US - given the midterm elections later this year. While these short-term waivers, particularly the one on Russian barrels already loaded on tankers, helped bring more oil to the market, their impact on international oil prices is not so clear, as prices have remained elevated since early March. Moreover, the waivers attracted criticism from various sections within the US; critics argued that the waiver for Russian oil led to a windfall for Moscow, which in turn would be used to fund its war effort in Ukraine.

Similar arguments were made against the waiver for oil from Iran, with whom the US was locked in battle in West Asia. India cashed in big on the waiver to buy Russian oil already on water. The country's Russian oil imports surged through March and April so far, as its refiners moved quickly to secure supplies amid the global supply crunch.

Although the West Asia crisis persists, the waiver is now gone, which could lead to some reduction in oil flows from Russia to India. Nonetheless, Russian oil is likely to dominate India's oil import slate for the foreseeable future. How India capitalised on the Russian oil waiver The sanctions waiver for Russian crude was first issued specifically for India in the first week of March and was later extended to all other countries.

This waiver allowed countries to import Russian crude for a month - including from sanctioned entities and on board sanctioned tankers - that was loaded on or before 12:01 am Eastern Daylight Time, or 9:31 am India time, on March 12. A week later, a similar waiver was issued for Iranian oil loaded on tankers before March 20. While government sources maintained that India didn't require a waiver from the US to buy oil from Russia, industry experts said that the waiver indeed helped.
