Category: Editorial
Title: Warning signals for India from NATOs Ankara Part One

Warning signals for India from NATO's Ankara summit

NATO's Ankara summit Europe's defence revival and commitments may create new challenges for India's defence needs The heads of state or government of the 32 countries that are politico-military allies under the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) met in Ankara, Türkiye, on July 7-8, 2026 for what is called the Ankara Summit. Their stated objective was to review progress made since the 2025 Summit in The Hague and to set out a roadmap for continuing delivery on NATO's key objectives. The gathering in Ankara is being regarded as one of NATO's more successful summits, despite the abrasive presence of United States President Donald Trump, who devoted most of his speaking time to extolling the putative success of U.S.

strategy and talking up the superiority of American weapons systems. A strategic road map Four substantive commitments came out of Ankara. First, the 32 NATO allies  - too often divided by divergent objectives and capacities  -  agreed on their "ironclad commitment to (their) collective defence under Article 5 of the Washington Treaty, and to the transatlantic bond"; second, the unanimous endorsement of "The Hague defence commitment", in which all NATO members undertook last year to allocate at least five per cent of their respective Gross Domestic Products (GDPs) on defence by 2035  -  an unprecedented hike over the two per cent spending pledge that existed earlier.

Third, NATO declared its "unwavering support for Ukraine in defending its freedom, sovereignty and territorial integrity", and fourth, the alliance partners vowed to build a high technology, high capacity, Europewide defence industrial base (DIB)  -  the term for the network of firms, factories, laboratories and skilled workers needed to build and sustain a country's military power. The focus in Ankara was overwhelmingly on implementation  -  turning political commitments into military capability through investment, industrial capacity and innovation. Russia accuses the U.S.

and European democracies of unbridled expansionism, through NATO's progressive incorporation of East and Central European countries. These include Poland, Romania, the Baltic states, and former Soviet republics that Moscow has historically regarded as lying within its sphere of influence. Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022 was driven in part by the fear that Kyiv was inching towards joining the Atlantic alliance, a step that would have increased NATO's numbers from just 12 countries at its founding in 1949 to 31 now.

The Russian invasion effectively blocked Ukraine, but spooked historically neutral Finland and Sweden into abandoning nonalignment and becoming NATO's 31st and 32nd members. NATO's transformations NATO, however, sees itself not as expansionist, but as merely adapting to Europe's changing strategic landscape. In 1990-91, with the relatively peaceful ending of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact, NATO shifted its focus to out of area operations in theatres such as the Balkans.

After the 9/11 strikes in 2001 on the World Trade Center towers, NATO made another strategic shift, joining the Global War on Terror. Now, with Russia and China joining hands in a new era of superpower confrontation, NATO is adapting once again. It was evident from the discussions at the Ankara Summit that Europe has prioritised the revitalisation of its DIB.

The European defence industry was struggling to scale up production even before the five per cent defence spending pledge at The Hague. European defence industry giants, MBDA and Rheinmetall, have warned of shortages in ammunition production. Operation Epic Fury, the U.S.-Israel bombing campaign against Iran, illustrates the inevitability of weapons and ammunition shortages when Asian allies' demands for U.S.
