Category: Editorial
Title: Wars are affecting the environment Part One

Wars are affecting the environment

One of the worst environmental disasters Tehran experienced recently was when its oil refineries and depots were hit by US and Israeli jets. One of the worst environmental disasters Tehran experienced recently was when its oil refineries and depots were hit by US and Israeli jets. Thick black smoke billowed into the sky, making day seem more like night.

Toxic rain mixed with oil fell from the air, while a central boulevard was lined by a wall of flame. The explosion released large quantity of toxic hydrocarbon and sulfur and nitrogen oxides. While residents were confined inside their homes, they could barely breathe. Highly acidic rainfall could further cause chemical burns to the skin and has the potential to damage the lungs severely.

Despite rain dispersing much of the pollutants, the smell of the smoke was quite intense. The intensifying war in the middle East has sent energy prices soaring and led to global economic uncertainty. It is a repeat of what the region had experienced in the 1990s. Iraq's then president Saddam Hussain had blown up 700 Kuwaiti oil wells during the first Gulf war.

It took more than ten months to extinguish the fire, that too after using sea water. This was the third biggest environmental disaster after the Chernobyl nuclear disaster and the Bhopal gas tragedy. The fire in Kuwaiti oil wells that burned for ten months and threw pollutants across the region had also caused black snow in the distant Himalayas.

It impacted the Indian monsoon in that period. Turkey, Bulgaria and Pakistan, too, experienced black rains. Environmental damage in Kuwait was severe and experts estimated that it would take at least hundred years to recover. Ninety per cent of Kuwaiti soil was contaminated. Use of sea water to extinguish the fire added salinity to the soil.

The firefighters engaged in putting out the fire suffered from severe health issues. Medical experts, who examined the lungs of firefighters, said that each of them had smoked for three years at the rate of three packs of cigarettes a day. It was a huge environmental and health cost to the nation. The recent hits by the US and Israel on one side and Iran on the other on energy infrastructure, oil refineries, oil-stocks and ships transporting oil in Iran, Kuwait, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Israel and UAE ensures that the environmental damage is aggravated.

The recovery of Kuwaiti soil certainly gets postponed by another century. The black rains that followed in Tehran in the recent conflict contain all atmospheric pollutants. The environment is choked with the pollutants released from the burning of heavy fuel  -  a low quality byproduct of oil refining, and these are methylene chloride, benzene and acetone.

We should be aware that benzene causes cancer. Whenever there is a fire in huge quantity of oil, the combustion is incomplete and unburnt particles are released in the atmosphere to trigger human health risks. In contrast, combustion inside a car engine is always complete. Oil also contains sulphur and nitrogen, which are oxidized in burning and result in formation of oxides.

The oxides reacting with moisture bring acid rains. The sulphuric, sulphurous, nitrous and nitric acids come along with rains, which can immediately cause irritation in human eyes and throat. The water finding its way into the drainage system makes surface and underground water hazardous for aquatic and human life.
