Category: Editorial
Title: Wars are linked but will America act Part One

Wars are linked, but will America act?

The ongoing conflicts in Ukraine and Iran may be distant from each other but both appear linked in some manner. The ongoing conflicts in Ukraine and Iran may be distant from each other but both appear linked in some manner. Both have impacted the global economy; enhanced costs of oil and grains.

Refineries have given emphasis on refining crude for general use rather than for heavy fuel oil used by the shipping industry. This could increase shipping costs in the days ahead. US actions of imposing sanctions have further impacted availability of fuel. Russia and Iran have always had close defence ties and both have backed the other in some manner.

Iran provided Russia with drones and technology to enhance its capabilities and production in the initial days of the conflict. These wreaked havoc in Ukraine alongside Russian missiles. There are also reports that in recent days, some drones overflew or landed in neighbouring countries, which are part of NATO, forcing the US to dispatch CIA director John Ratcliffe to Moscow to serve a caution to Russia.

There is a fear that Russia might decide to test NATO by engaging nations bordering it in some manner. Moscow has been providing Tehran with intelligence inputs, technical cooperation and logistics support through the Caspian Sea route. This implies Iran obtains real-time details of US naval vessels and regional bases enabling it to target them precisely.

Details of Israeli military targets have also been provided by Russian intelligence. Iran's missile programme has been backed by Russia. The C430L programme involved Russia providing Iran with ramjet propulsion technology to develop supersonic missiles. Both nations have avoided sanctions exploiting the Caspian Sea Route, though Israel has damaged Iran's Caspian Sea ports.

The US, which was amongst the strongest backers of Ukraine is now involved in a war with no end in Iran. It is itself running short of critical missiles. According to a report in the Los Angeles Times, the US possessed an inventory of 2,800 Patriot and THAAD missiles at the commencement of the conflict.

By the end of July, the number had dropped to 1,100. These have now been declared as 'scarce assets,' and it is claimed that current stocks are insufficient to deter either a Chinese invasion of Taiwan or a Russian attack on a NATO state, which is another reason why Ratcliffe rushed to Moscow. Ukraine faces shortfalls of military hardware.

The EU President, Ursula von der Leyen confirmed on X that Ukraine has sought European support to procure PAC-3 missiles for its Patriot systems. Kiev is now compelled to employ its older MIG 29 aircraft with outdated R-60 missiles to target Russian launched Geran 3, 4 and 5 drones and Banderol missiles, which travel at speeds exceeding 700 Kms per hour. It is also short of missiles for its F 16 aircraft.

In addition, there has been corruption and mismanagement in its procurement process. China, which has close ties with both Russia and Iran, is also seeking an end to the conflict. However, it wants neither to lose. Hence, while talking peace and end of conflict, it desires it in a manner that both nations end up gaining in some form.

This will strengthen its hold in Eurasia. China supports Iran by providing dual-use components and chip tools for its drone and missiles alongside access to its BeiDou navigation satellite systems, while procuring discounted oil. China is also known to have supplied Russia with key material for its drone industry.
