Category: Editorial
Title: Wars are affecting the environment Part Two

Wars are affecting the environment

'Scientists for Global Responsibility', a UK-based organization have estimated that 5 per cent of annual global emission, equivalent to 520 Mega tons of carbon dioxide equivalent, is caused by burning of fossil fuel in defense sectors across the globe. The emissions arise from intensive fossil fuel reliance in military operations, transport and supply chains. The US military is the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases.

In addition to this, wars cause massive emissions through direct combustion, infrastructure destruction, land and sea mines and fire in the landscape. The Strait of Hormuz connecting the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman is identified as an energy choke point, through which one-fifth of global requirement of crude-oil and gas pass. Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps along with the country's traditional navy control movement of ships through this strait, and have capability to deploy a 'gauntlet' of dispersed mine laying craft, explosive laden boats, and shore-based missile batteries.

The laying of mines in the sea can damage the environment and remains as a threat to aquatic life. The missiles and drones that are intercepted generate chemical laden debris, which fall on the agriculture lands on the outskirts of military and oil infrastructure locations. Aided by the fire on the land, the chemicals remain in the soil and bring down agriculture productivity considerably.

In Russia's war in Ukraine's Donbass region, forests have been destroyed and set on fire for facilitating operations. It has considerable environmental consequences. Trees are known to use carbon dioxide in 'photosynthesis' and when burned/ destroyed, the gas is emitted back in the atmosphere  -  a double whammy.

Ukraine's energy infrastructure was hit leading to power outage, when the population faced severe winter at minus 20 degree Celsius. They had no option but to burn coal and wood to keep themselves warm. This too caused environmental degradation. 'Scientists for Global Responsibility' have estimated that 254 Mega tons of carbon dioxide equivalent was emitted in US's aggression in Iraq, 32 Megatons of carbon dioxide equivalent was emitted in Israel's 15-month long Gaza war and 340 Megatons of carbon dioxide equivalent has been emitted in four years of Russian aggression in Ukraine.

To put it in prospective, the greenhouse gases emitted in the Russia-Ukraine war so far has been equal to the annual emission from France. The warming planet has been the cause of climatic catastrophes and disrupts the lives and livelihoods of vulnerable populations. Some island nations located between the tropic of Cancer and tropic of Capricorn face existential threats and may disappear under the sea if the planet warms by 2 degrees Celsius with reference to average global temperature since industrialization begun.

World leaders have a responsibility to follow the advice from scientists and to transition away from fossil fuel burning by developing renewable energy at peed and scale. They should also understand the contribution of war in global emission and avoid targeting oil/ energy infrastructures. By B K SINGH (The writer is former Head of Forest Force, Karnataka.)
