Category: Editorial
Title: Wars are linked but will America act Part Two

Wars are linked, but will America act?

It is also the largest procurer of Russian crude. Ukraine too has been involved in the Iran conflict. Apart from hitting an Iranian commercial vessel in the Caspian Sea in late July, killing a sailor, it also sent specialists and drones to Saudi Arabia, Qatar, UAE, Jordan, and Kuwait for defending them against Iranian drone strikes.

Iran has declared Ukraine as a target for future strikes. Both conflicts appear stalled. The Russian economy has been damaged and there are shortfalls of oil and gas. Ukraine is facing the brunt of Russian missile and drone power. Its ability to intercept them is diminishing by the day. Frontlines remain largely frozen.

However, both sides appear unwilling to move towards a resolution. On the Iran front, the war is now in a tit-for-tat move. Currently, both are engaging oil tankers of the other. The blockade continues with occasional strikes. The US claims it is winning the economic war over Iran but there are no signs of Tehran bending.

The Straits of Hormuz remain closed despite Donald Trump's bombastic claims of them being open. Trump, while refusing to term it as a 'war' described it as 'small potatoes' which has thus far cost the US $37.5 billion, not counting damages to its assets. There are reports that the US may vacate its damaged bases in the Middle East, playing to Iran's demands.

While Qatar and Pakistan appear to be negotiating between the US and Iran, Trump sent his chief negotiator Steve Witkoff and son-in-law Jared Kushner to Moscow and Kiev to try and negotiate a settlement. Neither is a professional negotiator, rather businessmen seeking long-term profits. Trump also spoke to Putin.

Differences between Ukraine and Russia appear to be difficult to mend unless one side bends. The feedback on the talks mention that Putin has refused to budge from his stand that Ukraine cede territory, reduce its armed forces and abandon hopes of joining NATO. Zelensky claims Russia is losing territory and facing increased losses.

He wants security guarantees and a strong army; he is also hesitant to surrender territory. With the winter approaching, the war will continue, with Russia continuing to target Ukraine's power infrastructure making it another difficult season. The threat to NATO will remain as before. Both conflicts have the ability to expand.

The Iran conflict with the involvement of Houthis, and Ukraine with Russia targeting NATO nations. In case that happens, ending the wars would be more difficult. Between the two conflicts, the Iranian one appears easier to resolve as a signed MOU already exists. Iran has been insisting that the US must accept agreed terms, while Trump dithers.

The war is drawing the US's attention away from the Ukraine conflict, which could spill into NATO territory, and the Indo-Pacific, where China is expanding its military power. It will also impact US midterm elections hurting Trump. If the Iran conflict is resolved, the possibility of the Ukraine conflict falling into place increases.

Will the US act? By Harsha Kakar (The writer is a retired Major-General of the Indian Army)
