Category: Editorial
Title: We need cool workplaces homes Part Two

We need cool workplaces, homes

The cooling-as-a-service (CaaS) business model can address this challenge, as the service provider can provide cooling services without upfront payment from users, and the cost of using CaaS is lower because it uses the most efficient cooling technology. These are Energy Services Companies (ESCOs) who are ready to offer CaaS but are not very comfortable entering into service agreements with MSMEs due to the latter's financial vulnerability. The Government can incentivise CaaS for MSMEs, which is cost-effective and affordable for them.

The Government, through an appropriate institution, can act as a third-party guarantor for ESCOs, just as the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises does for MSMEs. A guarantee from a credible institution can reassure ESCOs. In addition, concessional capital and blended financing can support ESCOs who struggle to raise external capital to scale up operations in the MSMEs segment.

In tandem with green-rated structures designed for thermal comfort as mentioned earlier, these cooling services can provide a sustainable, cost-effective, comfortable and lasting solution for the MSME workers as the temperature differential between outdoors and indoors is retained for long. It is important to note that people in the MSME sector are typically unorganised and vulnerable  -  they deserve decent working conditions as much as white-collar professionals. The use of BMTPC's Data Resource cum Monitoring Centre, paired with a digitally smart electricity grid and artificial intelligence, can help governments and facility operators identify hotspots (residential areas, buildings, factory sheds, etc) that are unable to provide thermal comfort.

These insights can further help improve PMAY and other schemes. By Labanya Prakash Jena & Prasad Ashok Thakur Jena is Director, Climate and Sustainability Initiative, and Visiting Senior Fellow, London School of Economics and Political Science; Thakur is an alumnus of IIT Bombay and IIM Ahmedabad
