Category: Editorial
Title: Wealth tax Is it the solution or the problem Part One

Wealth tax: Is it the solution or the problem?

Debt-ridden France is mulling wealth tax on the ultra rich. That the rich may shift to tax havens shouldn't stall the move President Macron has been pushing for much needed pension reforms in France but this has led to continued political unrest. The push to raise the retirement age from 62 to 64 by constitutional means, bypassing parliamentary debate, sparked accusations of authoritarianism and triggered strikes across sectors and mass demonstrations, particularly in 2019, 2020 and 2023.

More recently, the bloquons tout (block everything) movement organised shutdowns of highways, transport and city centres. Anger over social inequality, cost of living and perceived government distance from day-to-day realities, has ignited unrest, especially among youth and minority communities. Why is France trying to enact pension reforms?

Very simply, fiscal prudence. France's budget deficit last year was 5.8 per cent of GDP, the largest level since World War II and well above the 3 per cent limit required from members of the Eurozone. Second, France's ageing population is living longer. This is putting added pressure on fiscal finances on top of an already slow-growing economy with its pension payouts.

According to Eurostat data, France spends the third most on pensions as a proportion of its economic output (nearly 14 per cent of its GDP) compared to the other 27 European Union countries. Apart from pension reforms to generate revenue, France is discussing the imposition of a wealth tax, which is already being implemented in Spain, Norway and Switzerland. In Spain, the wealth tax, introduced in 1978, is levied on Spanish tax residents' worldwide net assets and on Spanish non-resident goods and rights that are located in Spain.

There was considerable political opposition to the imposition of Spain's wealth tax. Predictably, responses to the imposition of this tax have been tax avoidance, evasion and the creation of holding companies in low tax jurisdictions such as Luxembourg. Huge revenue mobiliser Yet, the wealth tax enjoys popular support due to its ability to raise large amounts of revenue, discourage hoarding and boost economic growth by redistributing wealth.

There is, however, the risk that the wealthy will relocate their assets, i.e., vote with their feet, to tax havens or they will simply evade tax. It is in this context that France has been debating the Zucman tax in the Assemblé Nationale since October 24 this year in the French 2026 budget. Named after Gabriel Zucman, a French economist known for his expertise on tax havens and economic inequality, the Zucman draft tax law proposes a minimal annual tax of 2 per cent on individual wealth exceeding $1 billion.

It targets approximately 3,000 billionaires globally. Commissioned by Brazil's Presidency of the G20 in June 2024, Zucman details a blueprint for a minimum tax on ultra-high-net-worth individuals. The report states that, ultra-high-net-worth individuals tend to pay less tax relative to their income than other social groups.

This regressivity stems from the failure of income taxes  -  which in principle constitute the main instrument of tax progressivity  -  to effectively tax ultra-high-net-worth individuals. This failure deprives governments of substantial amounts of tax revenues. Supporters of the draft law adopted by the Assemblé Nationale in February 2025 view it as a measure of tax equity and advocate it as France's solution to the debt crisis.

Its opponents argue that Zucman's wealth tax cannot save France from itself. The bill's critics argue that the tax on households with a net worth of more than $1 billion will contribute to tax flight and curb investment and risk-taking for businesses. Predictably, the draft bill was rejected by the Senate in June.
