Category: Editorial
Title: Well played

Well played

Measured response to Trump, the best way forward It seems that India-US ties are trapped in an awful impasse, of a kind not seen since the US imposed sanctions in the wake of the 1998 nuclear tests. In fact, that breach was resolved soon; India-US ties bounced back over the next decade. This time, the US has created a vicious tangle, thanks to the Trump administration's constant taunts, absurd assertions and hostile steps.

So far, India has displayed admirable tact and resolve in the face of this sniper fire. But it raises obvious questions of whether a trade deal looks possible in the near future, given the precipitous decline in ties. Since mid-2025, or soon after Operation Sindoor, the US has been rather hostile towards India.

The latest salvo was fired by US Commerce Secretary Howard Lutnick last week. He said that the trade deal did not happen last year, because Prime Minister Modi refused to call US President Donald Trump. His assertions are laughable, and the foreign office has done well to call his bluff. MEA spokesperson Randhir Jaiswal pointed out that PM Modi and phoned Trump eight times in 2025.

But what is really disconcerting is the Trump administration's demeaning, coercive manner. Just a few days before Lutnick's statements, Trump made graceless remarks about the need to placate him. Lutnick's view is that trade deals are a 'staircase model' where the country that agrees soonest gets the best terms, and after that the tariffs climb; by implication, India cannot get what it wants because "the train left the station".

This sort of arm twisting is unacceptable; India's food and energy markets cannot be prised open by force. Jaiswal's statement makes it clear that India prioritises its energy security. The subtext here is that while India is rebalancing its oil imports, with Russia's share at over 30 per cent and the US' share edging towards 10 per cent, the US cannot push so hard.

Earlier last week, Trump threatened India with '500 per cent tariff' for buying Russian oil. While the details of the Bill being drawn up in this regard are not known, it jeopardises $120 billion of goods and services exports to US. The US is trying its best to put India under the pump, but India should stay the course, as it has done so far.

India has been open about pursuing trade talks. But it has rightly chosen to expand its basket of trade alliances. India's exports are expected to rise over 6 per cent this fiscal, thanks to diversification of India's export basket. US' truculence is bringing various countries together to beat back Trump-induced headwinds.

This includes a subtle mending of fences between India and China, with India's exports to the latter climbing in 2025. There has been a resumption of flights and relaxation of visas as well. India should stick to its playbook of multi-alignment as a geo-economic strategy. A high tariff looks like afait accompliand the figure does not matter beyond a certain threshold.

These are grim times, but the present approach is working.
