Category: Editorial
Title: What the young want and why creating good Part One

What the young want, and why creating good jobs is no longer optional

Creating good jobs is no longer optional These men and women continue to aim for formal sector jobs or to become dynamic entrepreneurs a year after, because aspirations are long-term goals and not easily malleable. Our job seekers are willing to bide their time. What are the hopes and desires of young job seekers in urban India?

In the summer of 2023, armed with a long list of questions, we set out to survey over 3,000 randomly sampled men and women, 24 years of age on average, and living in the middle-class residential areas of Delhi. Our interest lay in understanding their journey towards employment  -  whether they were currently working or looking for work, or were planning to start their job search soon. The answers we got opened a window into the aspirations of this generation.

Almost 70 per cent of respondents  -  more men than women  -  told us they were looking for a job opportunity that would put them on their ideal career path from the start, instead of settling for just any job. Their career goal was predominantly being in salaried or formal-sector employment. More women job seekers aspired to these salaried positions, while only 14 per cent of the women we interviewed preferred being self-employed.

In contrast, more than a third of men wanted to start their own enterprises. Contrary to the dominant narrative of strong preference for public-sector salaried jobs, a comparable share of these men and women were looking for private-sector salaried jobs. Let's compare the above statistics with the occupational data from the PLFS in 2023.

Less than 50 per cent of India's urban workforce is in salaried jobs, a figure that is even lower for our age group of respondents  -  merely one in every three employed 24-year-old holds a salaried job. No more than 10 per cent of our urban workforce is in the public sector or government jobs, and only about 15 per cent are in the formal private sector. Of those working, 40 per cent are self-employed but an overwhelming majority of these are subsistence businesses that do not hire any worker and have an annual turnover of less than Rs 10 lakh.

So what are the odds of one of our job seekers landing her preferred salaried job or establishing a unicorn? Undoubtedly, the odds are stacked against these aspirational men and women. But even if the probability of getting their preferred job is low, could they obtain a job, even if not ideal, that could give them salaries they aspire to?

We asked respondents about their salary expectations from a range of jobs  -  accounts keeper, teacher in primary school, data entry operator, hospital attendant or electrician. We estimate the deviation of these salary expectations from the actual earnings for these jobs in urban India in the PLFS. Our job seekers expect up to 40 per cent higher salary than actual earnings reported in the PLFS for the same occupation.

Male job seekers, in particular, show greater over-optimism in salary expectations relative to women, expecting almost Rs 8,000 more per month than the actual average earnings for these jobs and Rs 8,500 more per month for salaried jobs. Altogether, salary expectations diverge from reality by more than 30 per cent. When we assess the job aspirations and expectations of job seekers who are below 25 years of age in our sample, we find that expectations are even more skewed  -  again, more so for young men than young women.
