Category: Editorial
Title: What should Indias long term energy

What should India's long term energy priorities be?

A shift away from LPG for cooking, focus on RE storage and promotion of energy efficiency are vital, going ahead India's economic growth is vitally linked to using more energy. Higher output in industry, transport, agriculture, and even the production of services needs more energy.

Further, economic growth increases people's demand for energy to power their appliances. Thus, there's a need to boost India's total energy supply every year, and this increasing supply must be affordable and resilient. Further, India is committed to fighting climate change by reducing its greenhouse gas emissions, which, in turn, means reducing the use of fossil fuels.

And that's another powerful reason to reduce the economy's dependence on imported oil and natural gas. These structural features of the energy sector define India's long-run energy priorities. First, India has become extremely dependent on LPG cooking, and must now quickly shift to other fossil fuels.

This will reduce reliance on a problematic fuel. First, LPG is largely imported, causing a stress on the country's foreign exchange. Second, LPG is subsidised for lower-income households, creating a substantial burden on government finances. And third, LPG use adds to greenhouse gas emissions. Making households shift from LPG cooking will not be easy as it is convenient and, unlike wood or coal, it does not produce smoke.

And the many households now connected to LPG are unlikely to give it up unless better alternatives are made available. Hence, the government and research institutions should prioritise the development of alternatives. The shift away from LPG is all the more important for establishments like dhabas and restaurant that prepare food on a large scale.

Currently, there aren't many non-fossil-fuel alternatives to LPG. However, good progress has been made in the use of solar power for large-scale cooking. For example, the Brahma Kumaris use solar energy to prepare thousands of meals every day at their Mount Abu facility. It is likely that the shift away from LPG will be led by non-profit groups.

So, it is important that experts help them to make the shift. Energy storage should be another focus area. Without cheap, plentiful storage, full use of renewable energy cannot be made. This is because renewable energy is a flow and is available only intermittently, not 24x7. At present, there are two major ways to store renewable energy: in batteries and as green hydrogen.

Batteries will surely be needed for large scale renewable electricity generation; battery-based electric vehicles are already well-known. What is perhaps less known is that hydrogen-powered forklifts and long-distance buses are already in use in India. To make significant progress in energy storage, strong financial support and promotion from the government will be required.

Third, India needs to promote energy efficiency in homes, offices, factories, shops, and transport. The Central and State governments already have various energy efficiency schemes. But these are not getting the kind of backing being given to solar power. This is the case even though it is well known that properly run energy-efficiency schemes are more cost effective than solar power.

Hence, the burden of promoting energy efficiency would largely fall on motivated non-profit groups. By Subodh Mathur The writer is an economist with extensive public policy experience
