Category: Editorial
Title: What to expect from the Budget Part Two

What to expect from the Budget?

With three quarters of the year gone by, there is a clearer picture on how the trade matrix has been affected. Sectors such as readymade garments, gems and jewellery, auto components, and leather goods were relatively more vulnerable to the new US tariff order. Most exporting units are in the MSME segment, which would be expecting some relief from the government.

Also, there are expectations that the production-linked incentive scheme will be fine-tuned, especially to meet the requirements of MSMEs. As exporters would also be potentially affected by the US tariffs, such a scheme would be timely. It would provide an incentive to produce, supported by the government.

This could find mention in the Budget. There could also be a focus on expanding export markets beyond the US to diversify across countries and products. Therefore, the Budget would be of interest to everyone this time, even though the conventional expectations of income tax relief would not find any major mention.

In fact, the Budget would tend to focus more on being a policy tool to address concerns in the economy as well as foster measures to bring about growth. This is also essential, given that the economy is in a sweet spot and a policy push will help bring about the desired acceleration. Further, the ideological approach on deficit will be watched closely as there is a resolve to follow the glide path of lowering the fiscal deficit ratio to the 3% mark eventually.

This also becomes important for the market as it determines the government's borrowing programmes. In the future, there could be a higher quantum of redemptions, which will necessitate a higher gross borrowing programme. In the current context, this number has played on the bond market as there has been a tendency for liquidity to be under pressure with deposits not growing at a fair pace.

By Madan Sabnavis, Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda Views are personal.
