Category: Editorial
Title: What the young want and why creating good Part Two

What the young want, and why creating good jobs is no longer optional

Are the youth in our cities simply out of touch with labour-market realities? There can be several reasons for these misalignments and high expectations  - lack of information or misinformation and inexperience with the job market, to name a couple of obvious explanations. We tested one hypothesis  -  can information about real-world job opportunities and salaries correct these job-market misperceptions?

So we set out to inform and expose a random subset of our 3,000 job seekers to the real world and re-surveyed both the informed and the non-informed a year later. Twelve months after receiving information, we find that providing accurate information about job opportunities significantly dampened job seekers' labour-market expectations of landing their ideal job relative to those who were not informed. Men, in particular, were less likely to report that they were on their ideal career path.

This disillusionment is accompanied by a decline in men's job-search intensity. Thus, as preferred job offers fail to materialise, job seekers adjust their expectations downwards and either remain in the same jobs or drop out of the labour market and enrol at educational institutions. Not surprisingly, correct information seems to have made the job seekers realise that their expectations were too high.

But did it also change the aspirations of these job seekers? The answer is a clear "no". Perhaps it is not surprising that the aspirations did not change. These men and women continue to aim for formal-sector jobs or to become dynamic entrepreneurs a year after, because aspirations are long-term goals and not easily malleable.

Our job seekers are willing to bide their time. Add to these aspirations the rising cost of good-quality education  -  more likely to be accessed through private educational institutions  -  then their job-market expectations are not just aspirational but necessary to recover the high cost of education. Policymakers must reckon with the fact that this generation is demanding good career opportunities  -  and that realising their aspirations will require nothing short of a structural transformation of the economy.

The challenge of formalising our labour markets by creating jobs with regular pay and benefits is a first-order concern. While the new labour codes are a step in the right direction, creating "good" jobs and genuine career paths  -  not just jobs  -  is no longer optional. Failing to do so risks squandering the potential of an entire generation.

Written by: Farzana Afridi The writer is professor of Economics, ISI (Delhi), and visiting professor, NCAER
