Category: Editorial
Title: What prolonged fasting can do to the human Part One

What prolonged fasting can do to the human body | Explained

Do to the human body | Explained New findings from controlled studies across the world reveal that the body undergoes significant, systematic changes across multiple organs during prolonged periods of fasting The story so far: As Sonam Wangchuk's indefinite fast entered its 19th day on Thursday (July 16, 2026), concerns have emerged about his health. As the 59- year-old Mr. Wangchuk protests the continuation of Education Minister Dharmendra Pradhan in his position, in solidarity with the protests organised by the Cockroach Janata Party (CJP), and the central government is yet to engage with them, experts have flagged serious concerns about his health and the impact of prolonged fasting on the human body.

According to Satish Lamba, the doctor who examined him, on the 19th day, Mr. Wangchuk's total weight loss exceeded 9 kg, and blood sugar was at 80 mg/dL and pulse, at 72. The blood pressure was at 105/61 mm/Hg, and hydration status was assessed to be fair. Dr. Lamba also said he remained mentally alert.

What happens during fasting ? Fasting is not new to humans. Multiple groups of people undertake fasts frequently, for religious, health or other cultural reasons. Those acclimatised to the process of fasting have developed the ability to stay without food for the specific period of the fast. In some Indian health systems, fasting is also counted as part of the therapy.

However, concerns emerge as age and duration of the fast advances. New findings from controlled studies across the world reveal that the body undergoes significant, systematic changes across multiple organs during prolonged periods of fasting. Primarily, during fasting, the body changes its source and type of energy, switching from consumed calories to using its own fat stores.

Prolonged fasting for 5-20 days produces weight loss  -  mild to moderate  -  of 2% to 10% and potent increases in circulating ketones, concludes a study published in the peer reviewed journal Nutrition Reviews. Approximately two-thirds of the weight lost is lean mass, and one-third is fat mass. When excessive lean mass is lost, fasting will result in the break down of muscle proteins, which is a concern.

Systolic and diastolic blood pressure constantly decreases with prolonged fasting, as seen with Mr. Wangchuk, as do blood sugar levels. If someone has diabetes, low blood pressure, eating-disorder history, pregnancy, or other medical risks, then complications are exacerbated. A study published in Nature Metabolism, for instance, which recruited 12 healthy volunteers to take part in a seven-day fast, where they were allowed to drink water but could not consume any food, showed fluctuations in different blood proteins.

This included an increase in coagulation factor XI, thus potentially heightening the risk of thrombosis events. In a Chinese study published in Nature, during a 21-day complete fasting trial, there was a significant decrease in body weight, a reduction in blood glucose, an increase in blood ketones and blood uric acid, a continuous decline in resting energy expenditure, and the respiratory quotient tending towards fat metabolism, meaning the body is shifting its primary energy source away from carbohydrates and toward burning fats. What are the adverse effects?
