Category: Editorial
Title: What explains SpaceX Blue Origin stepping up Part One

What explains SpaceX, Blue Origin stepping up their moon plans? | Explained

Origin stepping up their moon plans? | Explained Delays in NASA's Artemis schedule, tougher political oversight, and geopolitical pressures have pushed NASA leaders to speak more loudly about a moon-first agenda Two of the world's most visible private space companies are shifting their attention and resources to moon missions even as both continue to speak about longer term ambitions to Mars and beyond. For many years, the public identity of SpaceX has been fused with settling humans on Mars.

Its founder and CEO Elon Musk has repeatedly argued that a self-sustaining settlement on Mars would reduce the risk that a catastrophe on the earth ends human civilisation. He and SpaceX have also presented the Starship programme as the transport system that could render large-scale interplanetary travel feasible. Blue Origin, founded by billionaire Jeff Bezos, has projected a different long-term vision: of building industrial capacity in space so that heavy industry can move off the earth.

In recent years it has focused on developing its New Glenn heavy-lift rocket and a lunar lander for NASA's Artemis programme. It has also been flying paying customers on short suborbital trips aboard its New Shepard rocket. What have the two companies decided? SpaceX has also been central to NASA's Artemis plans to the moon for some time; now, however, the company is describing the moon as its immediate next priority in its sequence of major goals.

The company has reportedly told investors that it is targeting an uncrewed lunar landing by March 2027 and that Musk has decided to focus on building a "self-growing city" on the moon. He also said on X.com that this can be achieved in under 10 years even while claiming that plans for a Mars city could still follow in roughly five to seven years. For those unaware, SpaceX has already shifted focus to building a self-growing city on the Moon, as we can potentially achieve that in less than 10 years, whereas Mars would take 20+ years.

The mission of SpaceX remains the same: extend consciousness and life as we know it to… -  Elon Musk (@elonmusk) February 8, 2026 While the moon and Mars are both interplanetary bodies, missions to the former are easier for many reasons. The moon is under a week away by rocketflight, the distance is low enough for communications to be near-real-time, and the orbits of the earth and the moon are such that there are roughly three opportunities to launch to the moon every month. Going to Mars is much less forgiving.

The most fuel-efficient launch opportunities come around roughly once every 26 months, the travel time is in months, and failing to get to the red planet on one attempt will mean a multi-year delay before the next comparable chance. Musk has in fact leaned into these differences to justify SpaceX pivoting to the moon. Note that SpaceX is approaching an IPO and Musk has already merged it with xAI, another company he founded to use AI to advance "scientific discovery and gain a deeper understanding of our universe".

So Musk's claims are being subjected to more scrutiny than before, with investors and the general public also on the watch for inflated promises and hype. Late last month, Blue Origin also announced that it would hold its suborbital space tourism programme for at least two years and reallocate its resources to accelerating its "human lunar capabilities", including development work tied to the company's contract to build a lunar lander for NASA. Why have the two companies decided to do this?
