Category: Editorial
Title: What to expect from the Budget Part One

What to expect from the Budget?

It would tent to foucus more on being a policy tool to address concerns in the economy as well as foster measures to bring about growth WHEN THE UNION Budget is presented for FY27, it may at first appear to be a very normal exercise as the finance minister has already discussed the big announcements on taxation (including direct and indirect taxes) in the FY26 Budget preceding the festive season. The income tax structure as well as goods and services tax (GST) slabs have been rationalised.

It is unlikely that anything else can be done on these fronts this year. There is a lot of talk about whether we should target the debt-to-GDP ratio or the fiscal deficit. It does not really matter because while the debt-to-GDP ratio is a goal to keep up with global prudence standards, the fiscal deficit ratio is the route to be taken - if the fiscal deficit progression is controlled, the debt-to-GDP ratio will come down automatically.

If not, it is unlikely to decelerate as the redemption calendar is well-known and fixed. The goal is to reach the 3% mark. Covid-19 upset calculations, now being reversed as seen in the glide path. A frequent issue is that with growth in nominal GDP being low, the ability to bring down the fiscal deficit ratio is constrained.

That is a fair point because if the denominator of a ratio changes slowly while the numerator increases in the normal course, the ratio will tend to increase. For FY26, the GDP number of ₹356 - 357 lakh crore has been maintained, which was used as the base at the time of the Budget. This happened because the FY24 numbers were revised upwards, yielding the same with a lower growth number in FY25.

For the year, there would be no disadvantage of a lower GDP number. The critical question would be how revenue and expenditure has been managed during the year. The major challenge in drawing up the Budget is data. The GDP and inflation base years are to be changed from this year, and the new series is expected in February, after the Budget.

This will be interesting because the GDP numbers with a new base could show an upward tendency, which will be beneficial for the Budget numbers. At the same time, the inflation numbers could have a lower bias once indices are revamped with more relevant composition and weights. If there is significant difference in the old and new series, there has to be a recalibration of the numbers later.

It can be expected that the ratios announced on February 1 could change. In fact, even the past numbers will change once the new series is adopted. This time, government action on customs duties will merit attention. India has signed some trade deals with other countries, and the big one with the US is also on the anvil.

All trade negotiations involve countries offering concessions to the other - either specific concessions for products or a generalised tariff structure which affects imports from all countries. Therefore, changes in the customs structure will be high on the agenda and watched closely by industry as both users and suppliers of such goods. On the tariffs front, the Budget would also be the policy that can address challenges faced by exporters.
