Category: Editorial
Title: What explains SpaceX Blue Origin stepping up Part Two

What explains SpaceX, Blue Origin stepping up their moon plans? | Explained

In the U.S., NASA's priorities have become a political fight. Some leaders want it to fly to the moon first while others talk up Mars. When the U.S. Senate pressed NASA Administrator Jared Isaacman on whether pushing to go to Mars first would weaken the agency's moon programme, including Artemis, he replied that NASA could pursue both and tried to assure lawmakers that he supports the current moon plan and that he isn't taking directions from Elon Musk.

(SpaceX is one of NASA's biggest contractors. Isaacman has also flown twice on privately funded SpaceX missions that he organised and paid for, Inspiration4 and Polaris, which makes him both a customer and a high-profile partner of SpaceX. Musk also pushed for Isaacman's nomination, and senators explicitly asked Isaacman whether he had discussed how he would run NASA with Musk.

While he answered that he had not, the fact that this was asked in a confirmation hearing says the suspicion of undue influence existed.) The simplest explanation for the pivot is that it improves the rate at which SpaceX can learn the technologies it most needs to mature. Another possibility is that in the current environment, lunar missions are also accompanied by external demand and more legible milestones. Musk's remarks come as the competition between the U.S.

and China to return humans to the moon has intensified. As a result, being able to go to the moon has become a marker of geopolitical leadership and, importantly, a top priority for NASA. Blue Origin, on the other hand, has two big problems it needs to solve to get to the moon: it needs to prove it can execute such complex, human-rated systems and it needs a near-term programme with real deadlines and external accountability.

And its contract to build a lunar lander for NASA gives it both. Moon work is also more politically tractable than suborbital tourism, and if it succeeds Blue Origin can buy credibility with NASA and with the broader space community. Shouldn't they have seen NASA's plans coming? Curiously, NASA's focus vis-à-vis humans in space has been about getting to the moon first.

Should SpaceX and Blue Origin not have seen this coming instead of making a hard turn towards the moon within a month of each other? Perhaps the surprise isn't that they both had plans for the moon but that they both kept centering their timelines and product narratives on getting humans to Mars for such a long time. There's no need for public narratives to be the same as internal ones.

SpaceX's brand has been built on getting to Mars and Musk has repeatedly used Mars dates as a way to signal the company's ambitions, to attract talent, and to keep public attention on Starship. Internally, however, the company has been deeply embedded in moon-related work thanks to the NASA contracts. And today, SpaceX and Musk are aligning the internal and external narratives and clarifying  -  or perhaps admitting  -  that the next major milestone is in fact a lunar landing, and that Mars will only come later.
