Category: Editorial
Title: Where is the rupee headed Part One

Where is the rupee headed?

? Despite depreciating, it looks satisfactory on a comparative scale. Being a country with a current account deficit means the rupee should weaken The Iran War has evidently turned the markets upside down. What appeared to be going well for the world economy has now become an uncertain spectre. The stock market continues to display nervousness with no end in sight.

But a factor which affects all countries is currency, and the rupee is once again under pressure. With the Rs 92 mark being breached, the logical question is, how much higher or lower can it go? The answer is really a shrug because one does not know the intensity and length of the war. The rupee will be driven by two sets of factors - the fundamentals (imports, remittances, foreign portfolio investors [FPIs]) and the strength of the dollar.

This is the challenge for the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) which has, so far, dexterously steered the currency away from volatility. The issue is that whenever one speaks of the rupee, it is necessary to also see how other currencies are faring. Absolute depreciation numbers do not connote much as the current spate of movements is interlinked with what happens to other currencies.

Within the fundamentals, the obvious factor pressuring the rupee is the higher cost of imports. As oil is the largest component of the basket, any increase in price gets added to the trade deficit. Products like fertilisers and chemicals also get affected indirectly, which widens the deficit. On the other hand, the increase in exports may not work out given that the direction is also to countries embroiled in the war.

As for remittance flows, there is a large expat population in the Gulf and other western countries. This segment has been a useful contributor to remittance flows that has strengthened the current account deficit even when the trade deficit was high. Remittances from this region could be around 35% of the total, which is significant, given that the country could be getting anything between $135 billion $150 billion in good times.

Also the expat population in this region could tend to belong to the low-skilled labour class whose earnings are also not very high. This means that any job loss or reduction in pay can lead to a sharper fall in remittances. This contrasts with the western world, where the population tends to be in high-skill jobs.

FPIs have been quite destabilising in the last couple of years, especially at a time when the West is going in for quantitative tightening, which has lowered the quantum of investible funds. To top it all, any news on tariffs has caused the funds to shift markets, which is now exacerbated by the war. Therefore, these flows will have a bearing on the daily movement in currency.

The conundrum here is that investments are based on how investors see markets and growth of economies. Further, currency stability is important as a declining rupee will mean lower real returns. Therefore, the end result is always uncertain. Indian markets were not the best performing ones until the war began as there was a sense that stocks were overvalued.

Hence, the review of alternative markets that will be made by these investors will guide these inflows. Normally, all these fundamental factors are represented by the change in forex reserves. Here, the economy is in a strong position as reserves are comfortable at over $700 billion covering around 11 months of imports.
