Category: Editorial
Title: Where is the rupee headed Part Two

Where is the rupee headed?

Beyond fundamentals lie the external factors. Speculative forces are important here. A falling rupee will make importers rush to buy dollars, while exporters would like to hold back retracting their dollars, hoping to get more rupees once the conversion takes place. This becomes self-fulfilling and hence the RBI's action becomes important.

As a custodian of forex assets, the RBI has been stepping in often to ensure that these forces are curbed ,through the outright sale of dollars or taking forward positions, which sends strong signals to the market. The positions in the non-deliverable forward market provides good indications on this aspect. But when it comes to what happens to the dollar, no central bank can do anything.

When the dollar strengthens, there is a tendency for other currencies to weaken. The dollar index has moved closer to the 100 mark, which has automatically pulled other currencies (including the rupee) down. The trick is to ensure that the rupee remains within range and does not lose out on the depreciation, which will help retain export competitiveness without making it appear as a weak currency.

Once again, it is the RBI that holds the strings. Presently, it is hard to guess which way the dollar will go. With gasoline prices already climbing, inflation should increase in the US, causing the Fed to pause rate cuts. This means the dollar will strengthen. However, an unending war will impose more pressure on the dollar as it would not reflect well on the economy.

The rupee, though depreciating, looks satisfactory on a comparative scale. Being a country with a current account deficit means that the rupee should weaken. This is more so at a time when the capital account has been weak with negative FPIs and low, single-digit foreign direct investments, as repatriations are high.

The present exchange rate of above Rs 92/$ does not look off the mark, though the indications going by the non-deliverable forward market talk of Rs 93/$ in the next couple of months. A conservative approach will be to look at a range of Rs 92-93/$ for the next month or so. By Madan Sabnavis, Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda
