Category: Editorial
Title: Whither Indias FTAs Part Two

Whither India's FTAs?

Thus, India's trade deficit with these countries increased from $15 billion in 2010-11, or less than 13% of the overall deficit, to $73 billion, or 26% of the overall deficit. Not surprisingly, the present government had prioritised a review of these FTAs to identify the reasons for the widening of India's trade deficit. Reviews of the agreements with ASEAN and Korea are ongoing.

What does the future portend for India's FTAs with major trade partners, especially from its market access perspective? India's exports to the UK, the EU, and the US must respond to two sets of challenges if it has to maintain even moderate levels of trade surpluses with these partners. First, President Trump's policies could be disruptive, particularly for mobile phone and petroleum exports.

In response to Trump's pressure on American companies to invest domestically, Apple has promised investments of $600 billion over four years so "that iPhones sold in the United States of America are also made in America". Apple's move to establish manufacturing facilities in the US to serve its domestic market could jeopardise a sizeable share of India's mobile exports. India's exports of petroleum products could also be affected if India yields to President Trump's pressure to stop importing crude oil from Russia.

Secondly, trade surpluses with the US and the EU, in particular, could be dented to a significant extent as India prepares to open its market at the end of the ongoing FTA negotiations. Of course, this could change if India can leverage the market openings offered by its partner countries well enough to maintain its exports, something it could not do with its FTA partners in East Asia. The silver lining is that there are indications that exports to India's FTA partner countries in East Asia could improve significantly.

Automobile exports to Japan increased almost three-fold in 2024-25 as compared to the previous year, as Japanese companies are using India as a production base for several vehicles, which are exported to the Asian nation. Moreover, each of these countries has seen progressively higher levels of mobile phone exports in recent years, which is a positive augury. India must leverage these developments while reviewing the FTAs with its East Asian partners to push for substantially improved market access in these countries.

The writer is a distinguished professor at the Council for Social Development, New Delhi
