Category: Editorial
Title: Whither Indias FTAs Part One

Whither India's FTAs?

Trade surpluses with US, EU could be dented; export prospects in East Asia a silver lining. With President Donald Trump indicating that the US is "pretty close" to reaching a trade deal with India and the India-European Union (EU) trade agreement seemingly in sight, India could soon be implementing 12 bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs). This marks a complete turnaround in India's trade policies, from an FTA-sceptic before negotiations of the first of its major agreements with ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) members were initiated in 2003, to one that is among the most active in signing bilateral trade deals.

India is now either implementing an FTA with each of the G7 countries or is engaged in negotiations to conclude one. It has FTA engagements with every East Asian country, barring China, and is engaged in at least a preferential trade agreement with countries in every region, except in Africa. The recent series of FTAs, either being implemented or nearing completion, has been significant.

Since 2022, agreements have been signed with the UAE, the UK, the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), and Mauritius, and an early harvest deal was completed with Australia, with the expectation that a comprehensive deal would be signed in the near future. While negotiations are ongoing with Canada, Israel, and New Zealand, those with the two major economies, the US, and the EU have attracted most attention. India's FTAs, including the ones being implemented or under negotiations, accounted for nearly 57% of its total trade in 2024-25, and almost 71% of exports.

Exports to the UK, the EU, the US, and Australia have grown impressively, driven by two industries, namely mobile phones and petroleum products; pharmaceuticals were also instrumental in increasing exports to the US. Mobile phone exports to the US grew spectacularly over the past five years. The share of this product in India's exports to the US increased from less than 5% in 2019-20 to over 18% in 2024-25.

As much as 42% of India's mobile phone exports went to the US last fiscal, increasing further to 67% during April-August of 2025-26. Petroleum product exports to the EU, the UK, and the US have increased since India upped its reliance on cheap Russian crude, showing that the Western alliance continued to "indirectly" import Russian oil. The EU, which accounted for 13% of India's petroleum product exports in 2021-22, increased its share to almost 24% in 2024-25.

The US was India's third-largest market for petroleum products in 2022-23, pulling back its imports only in 2024-25. While exports to the UK, the EU, and the US remained quite buoyant, imports from these countries were not quite so, resulting in a trade surplus with each of these partners. The surplus with the UK trebled since the end of the previous decade, while the surplus increased by almost 2.5 times with the US.

With the EU, India was able to turn a small deficit into a surplus that grew to $15 billion in 2024-25. However, FTAs with the ASEAN members, South Korea, and Japan - with whom India finalised its first three major FTAs - did not produce the expected benefits, namely helping India to substantially expand its presence in these markets. In fact, exports to these countries remained sluggish during the decade and a half of the implementation of the three FTAs, while imports increased consistently.
