Category: Editorial
Title: Why NEET is more prone to paper leaks than Part One

Why NEET is more prone to paper leaks than JEE

NEET vs JEE: How is the conduct of JEE different from NEET, and why do they not follow the same pattern? NEET Paper Leaks: Multiple people have been detained in Maharashtra and Rajasthan amid a widening probe into the NEET-UG paper leak, which led to the exam being cancelled. Lakhs of students have been affected by the cancellation.

But this is not the first time irregularities have surfaced in this medical entrance exam. In contrast, the JEE, the engineering entrance exam, has seen relatively fewer controversies. How is the conduct of JEE different from NEET, and why do they not follow the same pattern? What are NEET and JEE? The National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (Undergraduate) is a pen-and-paper entrance exam for admission to undergraduate medical institutions.

It is conducted by the National Testing Agency (NTA) in 13 languages  -  English, Hindi, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. The Joint Entrance Examination (Main), meanwhile, is for admission to Centrally Funded Technical Institutes. Students who clear JEE (Main) are then eligible to sit for JEE (Advanced), for admission to IITs.

While JEE (Main) is conducted by the NTA, with some involvement of the IITs, JEE (Advanced) is handled completely by the IITs. What is the difference in how NEET and JEE are held? The two main differences in how the exams are held is that more students take NEET than JEE, and JEE is a computer-based exam instead of pen and paper.

An online test removes several vulnerabilities from the examination process, like the possibility of question paper leak during transport and distribution to the centres. It also reduces the involvement of outside agencies, such as a printing press or a transport company. Then why can't NEET also be computer-based?

There are two main hurdles to implementing a computer-based NEET-UG examination. First, a very small number of centres are equipped to conduct computer-based tests. With NEET-UG being one of the biggest competitive examinations in India in term of the number of applications  -  around 23 lakh students appear every year  -  there aren't enough centres to accommodate them.

To compare, around 14 lakh students appear for the JEE. The NTA can conduct computer-based tests for only about 1.5 lakh students in a single shift. This would mean the NEET-UG would have to be conducted over at least 15 shifts and a period of weeks. Second, if the testing is conducted over several shifts, the process of normalisation would be a challenge.

"While there exists a process to normalise question papers across several shifts, as is done with examinations such as JEE, it will be very difficult to do so across multiple shifts and will lead to litigations and delay the admission process," said an official from the health ministry. To ensure fairness across shifts, questions for an examination are divided into different levels of difficulty, with a statistical process determining that each paper contains a certain percentage of questions from these different levels. The official added: "When it comes to engineering, many seats go vacant every year.

The stakes are not as high as medicine." Another official from the health ministry said that this was also in line with the indication given by the Supreme Court. After irregularities in NEET-UG 2024, there were also "rumours" of NEET-PG paper leak, which led to its postponement. The National Board of Examinations under the health ministry, which conducts the NEET-PG test, decided to conduct it only in the most trusted testing centres across two shifts.
