Category: Editorial
Title: Why its time to reset Indias insurance sector Part Two

Why it's time to reset India's insurance sector

Governance mechanisms There is a gap between formal governance systems and actual business practices. Companies file Board-approved policies for all areas of operations with the IRDAI which must be followed diligently. Instances of 99 per cent discount on rates or exceedingly high acquisition costs reaching 50-60 per cent point to governance issues.

The (FSDC) Financial Stability and Development Council is the apex-level mechanism for coordination among financial sector regulators. The RBI can share the direct and indirect payments received by all regulated entities (banks and NBFCs) from insurers over 10 years. SEBI can re verify data in public issues with the IRDAI.

Information concerning intermediaries, claims, legal disputes, pricing and investments in the sector can assist in regulatory decision-making. Intermediaries: Publish data on intermediaries and their associates who receive payments from insurers, directly or indirectly, in any form. It will also highlight concentration risk in the general insurance market.

A IBAI McKinsey report indicates that 10 out of 462 brokers control 70 per cent of the market. Claims: Disclose the portfolio-wise number and value of claims repudiated by insurers and pending legal cases. Analysis across all insurance portfolios could reveal patterns of disputes and help assess the industry's trust deficit.

Pricing data on major corporate property and group health insurance premiums and claims over a 10-year period, together with intermediary-related expenses, will help identify persistent under-pricing. The Insurance Information Bureau (IIB) and insurance councils can assist with relevant data. Investments data on incremental investments in government securities and other approved investments should be monitored, rather than focusing only on gross investment figures.

This will highlight insurers' cash flows and the yearly surplus available for investments. It is pertinent to note that even 25 years after the sector opened up, LIC's investments represented about 73.3 per cent (₹54.52 lakh crore to ₹74.4 lakh crore) of the industry's total investments/AUM as of March 2025. The IRDAI Annual Report Furnishing of Returns Rules, set up in 2000, must be recast with data and analysis to reflect all issues with brokers, corporate agents, web aggregators, online channels, along with GST and funds flow in the current integrated financial system.

IPOs and private equity inadequate disclosure has enabled valuation arbitrage on account of information asymmetry. The proposed regulatory reforms, together with Ind AS accounting and risk-based solvency requirements, could help bring valuations closer to underlying fundamentals. Stronger governance, comprehensive public data, transparent intermediary payments, better claims reporting and risk-sensitive solvency standards are essential for the insurance sector to make a substantially greater contribution to economic growth over the next two decades.

By Madhusudhan Pillai The writer is a senior insurance professional
