Category: Editorial
Title: Why the US anger against Indian immigrants Part One

Why the US anger against Indian immigrants?

Anti-immigration feeling peaks during downturns, when jobs disappear Indians in America are the silent minority, going about their doctoring and other techy things during the week and gathering at nostalgic desi oases on weekends. Zohran Mamdani's rise from zero to hero as mayor of NYC was perhaps the most stunning political event of 2025.

Senator Ro Khanna leading the push in Congress to release the Epstein files made headlines. However, recent hateful rhetoric about Indians including high profile Second Lady Usha Vance and Vivek Ramaswamy, indicates that something is amiss in the "melting pot". It triggered my curiosity to research the history of immigration in America from authoritative sources.

That the needle of hate has turned to Indians is not surprising, given the history and pattern of race relations in America. Xenophobia gets recycled over time and India's turn has come. More on the anti-Indian animus after a brief look at history. Looking back Irish immigrants were targeted in the period 1830 to 1860.

Fleeing the famine, about two million impoverished and sick Catholic immigrants crossed the Atlantic. Their practices conflicted with the predominantly Protestant culture prevailing in the US. They were vilified as criminals and rapists. In the job market the discriminatory post of "no Irish need apply" was omnipresent.

Italian migration in the late 19th century, mainly from the South, was triggered by economic hardship, agricultural calamity and domination by the North. The Italian migrants were the target between 1880 and 1920 as they were perceived as criminals, racially inferior and Catholic. They were stereotyped as having a proclivity for violence and organised crime.

In the 1950s the hate sentiment subsided as these groups attained social mobility and moved into the suburbs. World Wars I and II helped forge national unity and assimilation. They got inducted into the broader "white mainstream" in social hierarchy. German immigration peaked in the early 19th century spurred by food shortages and political unrest at home.

Their culture took root and thrived for nearly a century. The World Wars brought their loyalties into question. They came under surveillance. Bans on teaching German followed. Assimilation into society came at the cost of German identity and culture. Chinese immigrants in the late 1800s worked on railroads and in mining.

They were blamed for low wages. White labour unions clamoured for legislation and won. Japanese and World War II: Japanese Americans were incarcerated as their loyalty was suspect. This was driven by the frenzy of war, fear and racism. In times of national emergency and stress, laws are enacted to suit the rhetoric.

The Johnson-Reed Act of 1924 was explicitly designed to fix the racial makeup of America. Quotas were set based on the 1890 census and deliberately before the major waves of European immigration. It was repealed in 1965. The Chinese Exclusion Act (1882) banned Chinese labourers from immigrating to America.

This was later repealed in 1943. Title 42 (Public Health Authority) was used from 2020 to 2023 to expel refugees at the border citing the Covid 19 epidemic. The Alien Enemies Act of 1798 is still in effect today. It's used by the current administration to deport alleged Venezuelan gang members. The enforcement authority's crackdown on immigrants often targets people based on colour and race.

Wrongful deportations and detentions have been reported. Currently, travel bans, visa caps, extreme vetting and social media surveillance are the tools being used. Stories about immigrants change with the economy. In a good economy the immigrant is viewed as hard-working and doing jobs that native-borns don't want.
