Category: Editorial
Title: Why is India giving foreign investors a tax Part One

Why is India giving foreign investors a tax break?

In today's Finshots, we explain why the government is changing bond tax rules for foreign investors. The Story Every year, the government needs to borrow trillions of rupees, be it for infrastructure, skill development, or any number of government initiatives. And one way to do that is to issue government securities or G-Secs.

Think of them as IOUs. You lend money to the government today, and in return, it promises to pay you interest and repay you the principal later at a predetermined date. Mostly banks, insurance companies, and pension funds buy them, apart from retail investors. And over the years, India has tried to make our domestic bond market more attractive to foreign investors, too.

They did this through something called the FAR or 'Fully Accessible Route'. This was introduced back in 2020, and it basically allows foreigners to invest in certain government bonds without restrictions. Before FAR, foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) could only buy government securities up to specified quotas.

Once those limits were exhausted, no additional foreign investment was allowed. FAR changed this by designating certain Government of India securities as FAR-eligible bonds, which eligible non-resident investors can purchase without any cap. And this move paid off. Since then, India has steadily opened up its bond market and secured inclusion in some of the world's biggest bond indices, including JPMorgan's Emerging Market Bond Index and FTSE Russell's Emerging Markets Government Bond Index.

Now, a few years later, the government has announced tax exemptions for foreign investors on interest income and capital gains in eligible government bonds. Which makes you ask, "Why would India willingly give up tax revenue by exempting foreign investors from taxes?" Well, the answer is that India is trying to solve multiple problems at the same time. The most immediate one is participation.

See, despite years of reforms, foreign portfolio investors own just 2.96% of India's government securities. The reason is simple. Foreign bond investors have options. And lots of them. Whether it's a pension fund sitting in Canada, an insurance firm in Japan or an asset management company in Europe, they aren't just picking Indian bonds over nothing.

They constantly have to choose among Indian G-secs, US Treasuries, Japanese government bonds, German Bunds, and dozens of other debt instruments worldwide. So when they're comparing options, they're not only looking at the returns. They also ask themselves the following questions: • How easy is it to invest?

• How easily can money move in and out of the country? • How tricky are the tax rules? • How liquid is the market? • And how much paperwork is involved? In other words, the challenge is no longer convincing investors that India is worth investing in. India, being one of the world's fastest-growing major economies, has already done that.

Rather, the challenge is to convince them that India is an easy place to invest. Besides, commercial banks, insurance companies, and the RBI collectively hold close to 75% of all government securities. By removing taxes on interest income and capital gains, India hopes to make its bonds more competitive with alternatives such as US Treasuries and Japanese government bonds.

India has already seen a glimpse of what that can look like. When Indian government bonds entered JPMorgan's Emerging Market Bond Index in June 2024, analysts estimated that the inclusion could bring in another $30 billion of inflows as India's weight in the index increased. Plus, more participation can have an underrated side effect.
