Category: Editorial
Title: Why NEET is more prone to paper leaks than Part Two

Why NEET is more prone to paper leaks than JEE

Litigations, however, led to the Supreme Court directing that the examination be conducted in a single shift and it proceeded as it used to. Are computer-based tests secure? While there have been irregularities in computer-based tests, they are generally more secure. The question papers for these tests are not prepared by a single person.

A bank of questions of varying difficulty is prepared by several experts and the system chooses the questions on its own, based on a blueprint of what type of questions and how many of them are needed. And, the question paper opens at the designated time across examination centres together, removing the likelihood of it being leaked from one centre to others. There is no physical transportation of these papers.

The second official quoted above said: "When the papers are being transported physically across the country, there are multiple points of leak no matter how much security is put in place. It can leak from the printing agencies or simply a vehicle that is transporting it." They added: "NEET is an extremely high-stakes examination, meaning there are always people who are willing to pay to get the paper." Why is NEET so prone to leaks? The NEET-UG examination, which is the only way for students to get admission to a medical course, remains extremely competitive.

Nearly 23 lakh students appear for around 1 lakh medical seats across the country. The competition is fierce, considering students strive to get into government colleges that account for around half the medical seats. These colleges have a much lower fee structure than private medical colleges, where the fee may run into crores.

Another aspect, experts pointed out, was the coaching industry. With the coaching industry mushrooming across the country, there is an incentive for classes to pay to get question papers. "After all, the admissions for their next batch would depend on how many of their students get through the admission process," said an expert, on condition of anonymity.

After the 2024 NEET-UG irregularities, admission of 14 students was cancelled, candidature of 215 was put on hold, 26 students already enrolled in medical courses who participated in the malpractice were suspended, and several were debarred from taking the test for two to three years. Written by: Anonna Dutt
