Category: Editorial
Title: Why its time to reset Indias insurance sector Part One

Why it's time to reset India's insurance sector

Dia's insurance sector Stronger governance, comprehensive public data, transparent intermediary payments essential for the insurance sector to make a greater contribution to economic growth over the next two decades Reforms in insurance distribution are a key focus of the ongoing comprehensive review of the regulatory framework by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI). Insurance distribution in India is done mainly through regulated intermediaries, and a central issue is the remuneration paid to them. Historically, the Insurance Act, 1938, imposed statutory limits on these costs paid by direct insurance companies, which were modified from time to time.

These sub limits were removed to provide operational flexibility under the IRDAI Expenses of Management (EOM) Regulations, 2024, subject to an overall cap of 30 per cent on EOM. However, capping this overall limit has not adequately addressed the underlying problems of excessive intermediary payments, aggressive pricing, governance and insufficient transparency. Importance of insurance The insurance industry is a major component of India's financial system.

In FY26, the industry's annual revenue was approximately ₹13.4 lakh crore, comprising ₹10 lakh crore from life insurance and ₹3.4 lakh crore from non-life insurance. Insurance funds are closely connected with banks, capital markets, taxation and government securities, and thus have wider economic and financial-stability consequences. After the sector opened up in 2000, a few private insurers sought to acquire profitable business and increase volumes by paying higher acquisition costs.

Payments were sometimes classified under expenses such as marketing, publicity, printing, travel and information technology, effectively circumventing prescribed limits with differentials across distribution channels. Over the last two decades, aggressive marketing and competition for business became synonymous with rising intermediary remuneration and lower insurance prices across insurance segments. Penalties for regulatory violations have not been able to create effective deterrence.

The new framework being considered by the IRDAI, which according to reports, proposes to relate penalties to the nature and extent of violations, could be an important improvement. Effort-based remuneration and commission caps on specific statutory lines of business, such as motor third-party premium, may also be proposed. Aggressive pricing Higher acquisition costs, coupled with lower pricing, is leading a race to the bottom.

Recently, the IRDAI cautioned insurers that in the fire portfolio, some insurers were giving 99 per cent discount on standard rates. Further, the RBI, in its latest Financial Stability Report (June 2026), refers to "a direct financial stability concern" due to the persistent non-compliance to solvency norms by three public sector undertakings from Q4 2024-25 to Q4 2025-26. This is primarily due to sustained underpricing of key portfolios, including group health and high expenses.

Net losses piled up to ₹11,400 crore in FY26 (underwriting losses ₹20,267 crore). Despite a capital infusion of ₹17,450 crore since FY20, additional infusion of capital is required to keep these companies solvent. Estimates vary, inter alia, depending on the plans to sell equity holdings, such as stakes in the NSE, and the proposed change in accounting norms.

Some foreign insurers have also found the market difficult. An American insurance major, with 18 years of operations and total capital and share premium of ₹2,704 crore, had an accumulated loss of ₹1,457 crore as on March 31, 2026. A European insurer that commenced operations in 2008 had accumulated losses of ₹1,315 crore by June 2021 prior to being sold.
