Category: Editorial
Title: Will foreign banks exiting UAE home in on

Will foreign banks exiting UAE home in on India?

India has seldom been favoured as a regional headquarters. Better urban governance, currency convertibility could change this Energy shocks and a fall of remittance from the Gulf might occupy the energies of our policymakers for much of this year. These large issues, however, could lead us to overlook the banking shock in the UAE.

The UAE has more than a trillion dollars in banking assets, which are double the size of its GDP. India's GDP, at nearly $4 trillion, is eight times the UAE's but our banking assets (at less than $4 trillion) are only about three times the UAE's. The deep financialisation of the UAE is largely because it is an open economy that operates as a regional financial centre.

The leading names operating in the region include Citibank , JP Morgan, HSBC, Credit Agricole, BNP Paribas and our own Bank of Baroda. With oil, hospitality and tourism, trade and real estate sectors facing difficult times, the UAE banking sector will take a massive hit. International banks have largely shut down and pulled out their staff.

They are seeking safe havens  -  for a change this means physical safety and not tax-free status. While GIFT City may beckon these banks, it is unlikely they would move there. GIFT City is designed for the local investor seeking to invest in foreign assets, which is quite a different role. Also its location, in Gandhinagar, is not too attractive a place to live in and there are problems of talent attrition as well.

It's more likely that these banks will prefer established financial centres like Mumbai or Chennai, if given some incentives. India is not going to be a first choice for a Middle East headquarters. Even as a headquarters of an Asia level regional office India lags; WHO is one of the few international organisations to have a regional office here.

India bypassed It is somewhat surprising that the practice of bypassing India for a regional office has hardly changed in half a century. New excuses are found for the avoidance, such as Bengaluru's terrible traffic, Mumbai's overcrowding, Kolkata's dilapidated state and Delhi's life-threatening pollution. These are a reflection of poor urban governance more than anything else.

It is sometimes said in jest that the Minto-Morley reforms were our last serious look at urban governance. Municipal bodies (and district boards) then had the power to hire and fire staff rather freely  -  a much curtailed power a century later. In practice, few municipal politicians graduate to higher levels.

However, it is noteworthy that Chandigarh, which is a Union Territory, has escaped many urban problems. While there is no space for federally administered cities in our Constitution, Mumbai has expanded up to the Gujarat border near Dahanu. The Ahmedabad-Mumbai-Pune coast is turning into a giant megalopolis, with acutely divided political-authority and no overarching planning body.

Foreign capital and foreign banks alike prefer stable, low risk urban environments. And federally administered cities could be a possible solution. Any relocation of banks from the UAE will become attractive only if our policymakers address the issues of currency convertibility and lowering of import tariffs.

What is striking is that while the earliest concept papers on Bombay as a financial centre (like the Lovraj Kumar note) argued for trade liberalisation, tax incentives and limited currency convertibility, subsequent policy took the silo path. Each component was considered in isolation without any synergy. Our SEZs have no significant tax advantage since the introduction of MAT and the abolition of Section 10AA.

GIFT City is not linked to a free port and it has no tariff advantages. China used a dual currency system of both the Yuan and the Renminbi to gradually advance currency convertibility, and in the interim it used the tax haven of Hong Kong to access foreign capital. This path may not be feasible for us.

However, it is never too late to begin planning for a regional financial centre when our metropolises are mutating into megalopolises and our SEZs still have land to spare. By Brijeshwar Singh The writer is an economist who was formerly additional chief secretary of Tamil Nadu
