Category: Editorial
Title: Will the dollar deluge help Part One

Will the dollar deluge help?

It may buy some time, but cannot repair the cracks in the house When the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) announced measures on June 5 to mobilise US dollars through three different swap schemes, it sparked widespread speculation over how much foreign currency could it mobilise, and whether those should be enough to meet its set objectives. Since there was no clarity on these objectives, many analysts believed the immediate aim was at least to arrest the persistent slide in the exchange rate and buy some time to put the house in order.

The focus, therefore, was on the foreign currency non-resident (bank) [FCNR(B)] scheme, the star performer during the 2013 taper-tantrum episode, to gather the maximum dollar inflows by September 30. While market modal projections ranged between $50-60 billion, banks managed to raise $127.2 billion, forcing the central bank to close the scheme a month early, on August 31. A further $9.1 billion was mobilised through the still-open overseas foreign currency borrowings and external commercial borrowings schemes, taking total inflows raised to $136.4 billion  -  much above what the RBI was looking for.

As the inflow of dollars turned from a trickle to a deluge within weeks, analysts began to worry about the humongous cost it could impose on the central bank -  both in terms of fully covering exchange-rate risk and any sterilisation cost to suck out nearly `13 trillion additional liquidity in the system to avoid a premature monetary policy reset. In addition, one wondered if mobilising those high-cost foreign currency deposits made much business sense for banks, even after the RBI fully covered the exchange rate risk on the principal amount, and regulatory exemptions on the cash reserve ratio and statutory liquidity ratio. With fresh three-five-year FCNR(B) deposits carrying interest rates of 6-7.5%, forward cover cost on the interest amount, and potential credit risks, one is not sure if banks will make much money from mobilising `12.5 lakh crore deposits.

However, this piece focuses not on the cost and risks of the RBI's strategic policy action but on how much room policymakers have to restore India's external house back in order. Let's place the issue at hand in its proper context: After the 2013 taper-tantrum crisis, it was held that the house  -  the economy  -  had begun renovation, namely repairing the cracks and strengthening the columns to fortify the building and make it more resilient to external shocks. For example, the government opened debt markets to greater foreign portfolio investor (FPI) participation and liberalised FDI rules to attract capital inflows while the RBI absorbed those inflows to build foreign currency reserves of $700 billion.

These measures were meant to reduce seepages and reinforce the columns to withstand any tremor. But unfortunately, they have not been enough. Some have argued that India's foreign exchange reserves should be increased to $1 trillion or more to match the scale of its growing economy. Sure, but how? With the RBI having sold more than a $100 billion in the forwards market, the crack appeared in the column itself.
