Category: Editorial
Title: Will SHANTI create turbulence Part One

Will SHANTI create turbulence?

Nuclear power projects are capital intensive and their successes will hinge on the rules governing implementation Last week a pivotal step was taken in shaping the next phase of India's nuclear journey - the Sustainable Harnessing and Advancement of Nuclear Energy for Transforming India (SHANTI) Bill, 2025, was passed by Parliament. It consolidates and modernises India's nuclear legal framework, enables limited private participation in the nuclear sector under regulatory oversight, strengthens statutory regulation by granting statutory recognition to the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB).

"It supports India's clean-energy transition and the long-term objective of achieving 100 GW nuclear energy capacity by 2047," according to the government. The rationale behind this is to facilitate India's energy transition process, according to policymakers. There's a need to revisit the foundation of the country's nuclear framework to match present-day needs and future ambitions.

And with growing electricity demand, India needs to tap all resources available for generating uninterrupted power, this includes nuclear, they argue. Also, to meet the national target of 100 GW nuclear capacity by 2047 and advance long-term decarbonisation by 2070, a modern legal framework is essential, which enables wider participation, leverages indigenous resources, and integrates innovation with safety, the policymakers aver. Ankit Jain, Vice-President, Co Group Head-Corporate Ratings, ICRA Ltd, says it allows private companies to build, own, operate, and decommission nuclear reactors, including small modular reactors, which till now has been primarily done by Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd (NPCIL).

"This apart, the Government of India has announced allocation of ₹20,000 crore to set up a dedicated nuclear energy mission aimed at research, development and deployment of SMRs (small modular reactors) with a goal to operationalise at least five indigenously developed SMRs by 2033," he said. Fate of coal plants All these sound good. While debates can happen on the nuances of SHANTI, what also needs to be considered is whether India's electricity sector is ready for it?

Cost and infrastructure are the key components here, knowing that end at the of the day it is the consumers who pay. What happens to coal? As nuclear capacity grows under the SHANTI framework, it could result in speeding the retirement of old coal plants, especially non-pithead and high-tariff stations.

With these units already costly and polluting, signals on converting select retired coal sites to nuclear make them natural candidates for faster exit or repurposing. But will the States where these projects are be willing to adopt it? Once such coal stations shut, their existing transmission lines can be reassigned to upcoming nuclear plants, saving both time and grid-integration cost.

Only short, dedicated links and switch-yard upgrades would typically be needed from the new reactors to the current pooling points, enabling quicker evacuation of nuclear power once they start generating. Therefore, infrastructure or grind connectivity may not be that much of a challenge. Cost factor What could be worrisome will be the cost of this energy.

SHANTI makes nuclear power tariff more centralised, away from the usual State-level regulatory route. According to reports, a single national tariff framework is expected to give investors and States clearer price visibility and make long-term power purchase deals easier to structure. One will need to see how that evolves in the coming days.
