Category: Editorial
Title: Will capping credit card interest rates help Part Two

Will capping credit card interest rates help?

Many will take years to pay off this debt, during which time they will accumulate much larger obligations, including interest bills and penalty dues. If you make a $150 payment on that balance each month over 95 months, at an annual interest rate of 22.83%, you will end up paying an extra $7,688 in interest alone. Of course, taking on credit-card debt at a high interest rate is reasonable in some circumstances - particularly if the shortfall is temporary.

For example, an MBA student might need to cover living expenses for a few more months before taking a well-paying job. But someone whose income is too low to cover their living expenses, and who has no reason to expect this to change any time soon, will probably regret taking out debt at an interest rate of 22% or higher. One might counter that if a desperate person cannot access bank credit, they might go to an unscrupulous loan shark instead.

Even with a high interest rate, credit from a regulated bank is less risky than that. But, by this logic, virtually any protection for borrowers could be deemed inappropriate, and we have already collectively agreed that this is not the case. Two centuries ago in Britain, desperate people regularly agreed to become indentured servants for a creditor they were unable to repay, in order to avoid being locked up in Dickensian debtors' prisons.

Ultimately, however, debtors' prisons and indentured servitude were outlawed, and the institution of personal bankruptcy was established as a more efficient and ethical way of resolving unpayable debts. A libertarian might argue this institutional arrangement limits access to credit for the desperate. But overall, it appears a worthy trade-off.

The same is possibly true of interest-rate caps on credit-card debt. By Jeffrey Frankel The author is Professor, Capital Formation and Growth, Harvard University, & Research Associate, US National Bureau of Economic Research.
