Category: Editorial
Title: Will SHANTI create turbulence Part Two

Will SHANTI create turbulence?

Clause 37 (1) of SHANTI says, "Notwithstanding anything contained in the Electricity Act, 2003, the Central Government shall fix the tariff for supply of electricity from nuclear power plants based on such norms and mechanisms as may be specified by it by notification." It allows the Union Government to directly set nuclear tariffs using a notified formula, even if this means departing from the existing Electricity Act set-up. The formula can be a cause of concern if the process is not transparent. Ideally, the formula must factor in fuel costs, spent fuel and waste management, decommissioning and other lifecycle expenses, so these are reflected upfront in the approved tariff.

"The sector faces inherent challenges, including extremely high capital cost (₹16-20 crore per MW), long gestation periods, and plant stabilisation related issues. Private firms lack operational track record in this domain, raising concerns over execution risks and tariff competitiveness," he said. Says former Power Secretary Alok Kumar, "While it is a good move, we have to wait and watch, as the projects go to the States.

The size of the project States are willing to offtake has to been seen? What kind of generation size and demand profile we are looking at will also play an important factor." The interplay of storage and demand flexibility options, and how they work will decide the overall system costs, he said, adding that the nuclear plants will have to have some flexibility. "Pushing one resource beyond a point may lead to a situation where another resource may have to be curtailed.

How that will be managed also needs to be looked into," he said. Operator's liability While cost will have direct impact on the consumer, a worrisome aspect is capping operator liability in a graded manner based on reactor size; the amount is capped at ₹3,000 crore. Further, it removes equipment suppliers' recourse for damages, in line with global norms.

While this addresses the deterrent for suppliers, what happens with the product is a challenge, critics argue. "Nuclear projects are inherently highly capital intensive. Further, in India, so far the nuclear power generation rested with NPCIL, and thus private firms lack operational experience. This apart, frameworks for waste management, spent fuel, and decommissioning still remain in nascent stages," Jain said.

In a nutshell, one will have to wait and watch for the rules that will define how SHANTI will be implemented. By Richa Mishra
