Category: Editorial
Title: World Inequality Report Indias growth model Part Two

World Inequality Report 2026: India's growth model is leaving the 'middle' behind

This paradox is sharpest in high-growth states like Gujarat. While NITI Aayog data shows Kerala and Uttarakhand topping the SDG charts with scores of 79, Bihar languishes at 57, underscoring a massive capability gap. This feeds into a broader trend where inter-state inequality has modestly converged, while intra-state inequality has exploded.

The benefits of growth within states are increasingly captured by urban hubs and capital owners, leaving rural peripheries behind. Another example is the rural - urban divide, which acts as a primary filter for this inequality. The AEI data shows that while 92 per cent of urban households have access to clean cooking fuel, only 49.8 per cent of rural households do.

Similarly, while 58.9 per cent of urban India enjoys piped water within their premises, a mere 22.5 per cent of rural India possesses this basic necessity. This lack of infrastructure imposes a time tax on the rural poor, particularly women, contributing to a female labour force participation rate of just 15.7 per cent, one of the lowest in Asia. Even more disturbing is the horizontal inequality revealed when the AEI interrogates community-wise trends.

The synthesis of these two reports offers a formidable challenge to current policy thinking. The WIR warns that inequality is not just horizontal but vertical, driven by the collapse of public wealth. Redistribution is insufficient if delivery mechanisms are broken and state capacity is hollowed out.

A modest wealth tax on the ultra-rich, as suggested by the WIR, potentially raising 0.45 per cent to 1.11 per cent of global GDP, could fund the massive public investments needed to close the gaps identified by the AEI. But money must be directed specifically toward the "4As", ensuring that schools are not just built but are approachable for ST communities; that hospitals are not just available but affordable for the rural poor. India's inequality problem is not just a matter of redistribution but of state capacity.

Without rebuilding public wealth and public institutions, redistributive taxes will have nowhere productive to land. Written by Deepanshu Mohan and Ankur Singh Mohan is professor of Economics and dean, O P Jindal Global University. He is currently a visiting professor at the London School of Economics and a visiting academic fellow at University of Oxford.

Singh studies at the Jindal School of Government and Public Policy and is a research analyst at the Centre for Economics Studies, O P Jindal Global University
