Category: Editorial
Title: A deep cleaning of Indias electoral rolls Part Two

A deep cleaning of India's electoral rolls

Further, booth-level officers actively assisted electors in tracing their eligibility and obtaining prescribed eligibility documents. The SIR process marks a notable shift towards technological accessibility. For the first time, all supporting documents are digitised. Further, enumeration forms are being made available through online platforms.

After the publication of the draft roll, any person who has any claim or objections has the option to file the same using the online platform. The ECI did not restrict capacity-building to its own machinery but also trained booth-level agents of recognised political parties. The SIR guidelines also contain provisions for engagement with parties and sharing of electoral rolls.

What the numbers show Over 7.5 crore entries were subjected to verification during SIR in Bihar. The total number of electors removed from the draft list was 65 lakh. In addition to the 1,60,813 BLAs of political parties, the Supreme Court also deputed volunteers from the State Legal Services Authority to assist in the submission of claims/objections/corrections online.

Nevertheless, only 2,53,524 claims and objections were received in total after publication of the draft roll. Of these, only 36,500 were claims for inclusion (0.56% when compared to the total number of deletions during the revision). Not a single appeal was filed against any deletion. These figures indicate that the SIR exercise was, more or less, grounded in careful and accountable scrutiny.

By embracing SIR, the ECI has demonstrated that its constitutional duties will not be subordinated to convenience or political pressures. Instead, they are being pursued with clarity, courage, and accountability. A democracy strengthens itself not by avoiding difficult tasks, but by undertaking them when it matters most.

SIR 2025 is one such effort. Naira Jejeebhoy, Advocate whose area of practice includes election law and has represented the Election Commission of India in proceedings; Kumar Utsav, Advocate whose area of practice includes election law and has represented the Election Commission of India in proceedings
