Category: Editorial
Title: A deeper probe into FCNRB swap scheme Part One

A deeper probe into FCNR(B) swap scheme

Temporary comfort for the near term should not create conditions for a nation to sleepwalk into a debt trap in the longer term The RBI announced on September 21 that the FCNR(B) swap scheme had received a record inflow of $132.98 billion. This marks never-before capital flows to the external sector in general and to NRI deposits in particular. The numbers are historic and stand at a record level of external debt.

The consequences are several and severe: (a) reliance on debt forex reserves to address rupee depreciation and volatility; (b) an adverse impact on RBI's balance sheet; (c) stress on liquidity management on receiving inflows and their redemption when due; (d) stress on the current account deficit (CAD) due to interest payments; (e) stress on repayment at maturity; and (f) an overall adverse macroeconomic impact. The FCNR(B) swap scheme for deposits with maturities of three to five years was open between June 8 and August 31; it closed a month before the designated date of September 30. The early closure, announced on August 14, was a response to inflows far beyond expectations.

Under the scheme, the RBI covers the exchange rate risk on the principal amount: the exchange rate is the same at the first leg (when commercial banks sell dollars received under the scheme to the RBI) and at the second leg (when commercial banks buy the dollars back from the RBI to repay the depositors). The Governor said on June 5 that the swap scheme was intended to strengthen the balance of payments (BoP) position. depreciating rupee This came in the context of a steadily depreciating rupee against the US dollar, mainly because of net outflows of foreign portfolio investment (FPI)  -  $13.7 billion by early June  -  coupled with prolonged geopolitical tensions arising out of the West Asia conflict.

The INR-US rate touched a peak of 96.8441 on May 20, a depreciation of 13.33 per cent on a year-on-year basis. There was fear of a speculative attack on the rupee, and the market perceived that the rate could touch 100 to the dollar. To the extent that the objective of the RBI's exchange rate policy is to contain volatility, there was a need to strengthen the BoP position through the accumulation of forex reserves.

The scheme was made attractive to both parties to garner inflows. NRIs were offered interest rates well above what they receive in their home countries, with FCNR(B) rates rising to 6-7.5 per cent against a historical 3-4 per cent. Commercial banks were relieved of exchange rate risk, since the RBI swapped the principal at par and bore the full hedging cost, and fresh deposits were also exempt from CRR and SLR.

However, should the authorities have taken the debt route (FCNR(B)) to build forex reserves when reserves stood at about $682 billion? To argue that there are net benefits in the scheme is a misleading half-truth. According to the available data, outstanding FCNR(B) deposits were $33.756 billion before the introduction of the scheme.

Considering $132.98 billion of inflows under the scheme, the outstanding amount now stands at $166.736 billion. In our considered view, since NRIs have already invested substantial amounts, fresh gross inflows may not be sufficient to meet these obligations. Therefore, repayments of around $127 billion will have to be met from forex reserves.
