Category: Editorial
Title: A disturbing step for rights dignity and Part Two

A disturbing step for rights, dignity and mental health

No external knowledge or proof of any sort can determine the deeply held and personally felt experience of one's gender identity. There would have been no need for trans individuals to "come out "at all if that had been the case. This is the accepted truth in medicine and health care across the globe.

Therefore, it is perplexing that the Amendment talks about determining and validating someone's gender through a process in which the answer to the question "what is my gender?" has to be given by complete strangers. This raises many issues that seem to present challenges at many levels. Medical boards  -  many of which do not exist at the district level  -  are already overburdened even for urgent health-care needs.

In the absence of criteria, as well as time and process, it is likely that boards may fall back on arbitrary, invasive or abusive examinations, including the possibility of genital inspection. This stems arguably from the traditional way of "assigning "gender at birth by looking at the genitals of a newborn child by a doctor or another adult. This is far from what we know to be the understanding of gender identity for gender diverse and trans individuals.

Extrapolating this method to an adult and making it mandatory is in direct and complete violation of dignity, privacy and bodily autonomy. I cannot imagine any circumstance that would make me wish to approach this premise for myself as an adult cisgender woman. The very thought of such a scrutiny by a board of strangers, would probably create anticipatory mental distress and make me actively avoid approaching such a premise.

Instead of improving welfare access, the amendment will likely shrink it, deter individuals from approaching the state, and reintroduce fear and humiliation into an already vulnerable population. Mental health fallout, crisis in the making The transgender community already faces extreme vulnerability. Data show that 99% of transgender persons have faced social rejection; 52% have faced harassment or violence in educational spaces; 57% of trans women report experiencing physical or sexual violence at least once, and transgender adolescents have suicide attempt rates estimated between 13% and 50%, far above the national average.

Against this backdrop, introducing additional layers of suspicion, verification and scrutiny is not just insensitive. It is unsafe. As a mental-health practitioner and an ally for the trans community, I am deeply concerned. Not just prospective; what is concerning is the uncertainty for thousands of transgender individuals currently enrolled in health-care services, whose access may now be questioned or invalidated in the face of the ambiguity about supporting the gender exploration and gender journey of an individual.

This is not merely a procedural shift; it has the potential of developing rapidly into a public mental-health emergency. The amendment introduces a clause that criminalises 'undue influence' in helping someone identify as transgender, with penalties up to 15 years of imprisonment. For mental-health practitioners, psychologists, lawyers and educators, this creates an unprecedented ethical and legal risk.

In many families, gender-identity journeys create tension or disagreement. Community-based organisations, trans-affirmative mental health practitioners and services are frequently accused of 'encouraging' adolescents simply for acknowledging their lived reality. Under this amendment, such allegations could become criminal charges.

This will discourage health-care practitioners from providing essential, evidence-based care; challenge community-based organisations to remain as allies, and push transgender persons away from formal health care and heighten mental distress that will likely remain unsupported. Additionally, the amendment collapses distinctions between transgender, intersex and hijra identities, erasing cultural, social and biological differences. Trans men remain nearly invisible in the framework, further marginalising them.
