Category: Editorial
Title: A disturbing step for rights dignity and Part One

A disturbing step for rights, dignity and mental health

The Transgender Amendment Bill threatens welfare access and instils fear and humiliation for an already vulnerable population The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Amendment Bill, 2026 has caused deep confusion, perplexity, and, over the past two weeks since its introduction, apprehension and fear. In trying to make sense of both the intent and the possible implications of the amendment, these days have raised more questions than they have provided satisfactory answers. At the core is the question, "Who owns my gender and therefore my gender identity?" For the majority of men and women who happen to be cisgender, life hardly ever brings us to a point where we are faced with this as a question.

There is no 'evaluation' that we need to undergo. Whether it is a form at a hospital, clinic, bank, or workplace, we claim our gender ourselves by ticking a box. We simply state our gender, not expecting anyone to question the obvious. However, for gender diverse and transgender individuals, this is what is proposed henceforth.

This violates the foundational principles of dignity, autonomy and mental well-being. From progression to regression In 2014, the Supreme Court of India delivered a historic judgment in NALSA vs Union of India, recognising transgender persons as a legitimate gender identity. It was a watershed moment for jurisprudence, public policy and governance because it rested on a simple and powerful principle: gender identity is self-identified.

Just as any individual declares themselves a man or a woman without external verification, transgender persons, too, were reaffirmed as the final and only authority on their gender identity. This principle is rooted not only in human dignity and autonomy but also in constitutional morality under Articles 14 (Equality before Law), 15 (non-discrimination), 19 (Freedom of Expression) and 21 (Right to Life and Personal Liberty). In 2019, Parliament passed the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act.

While parts of it were criticised by the community, it remained aligned with NALSA on the cornerstone issue of self-identification. Indeed, it acknowledged the community's long history of discrimination and exclusion, and sought to prohibit discrimination, ensure access to education and health care, extend welfare measures such as housing, skill development and employment support. These welfare schemes, in our minds, as allies and health-care practitioners, represented an attempt to build an enabling framework rather than a restrictive one.

Much of the work being done at both the health-care training and education levels, as a result of the 2019 Act, requires sensitisation drives to ensure that curricula and training for health care and allied professions are sensitive to gender-affirming practices, and to make welfare schemes more widely known and implementable. In these six years, all stakeholders had just about started to align themselves with the global standards that the 2014 judgement and the 2019 Act both validated. The amendment to the 2019 Act  -  which was notified in the Gazette on March 30, 2026  -  fundamentally reverses the NALSA judgment.

It replaces self-identification with medical and bureaucratic gatekeeping, redefining who is 'allowed' to call themselves transgender. Under this amendment, a transgender person must appear before a medical board; undergo an assessment to 'prove' their gender identity; wait while the board forwards its recommendation to the District Magistrate, and obtain a certificate declaring them transgender. There is no medical or evaluative biomarker for gender identity.
