Category: Editorial
Title: A growth story that needs women at work Part Two

A growth story that needs women at work

Much has been made by government economists of the increase in women's work participation in India, post 2020. However, this increase built upon a GDP growth slowdown since 2017. Further, COVID-19 had induced economic distress, and large-scale return migration from urban to rural areas. With male workers losing urban employment and moving back to villages, women were compelled to intensify their role in subsistence agriculture and allied activities, often as unpaid family labour (UFL).

This surge in UFL reflected a "distress-driven feminisation of agriculture", as women entered or remained in insecure, informal, and unremunerated agricultural work, due to shrinking non-farm opportunities and reinforced gender norms that limited mobility. The share of such work was falling from 1983 to 2012, as was the absolute number of women in such work. The collapse of non-farm work for men and women now meant that adult, poorly educated women returned to agriculture.

The structure of India's economic growth has also contributed to weak female employment generation. Much of India's recent GDP growth has been concentrated in capital-intensive sectors such as finance, information technology, and organised manufacturing, which do not absorb large numbers of workers. Labour-intensive sectors such as textiles, food processing, garments, and small-scale manufacturing saw a fall in absolute terms in employment between 2013 and 2019.

In fact fewer women were employed in manufacturing in 2019 than in 2004 which shows how manufacturing jobs collapsed, despite all the hype about "Make in India" and Performance-Linked Incentives for manufacturing. It was not until 2022 that manufacturing work for women rose to a level found in 2004. In much of India, manufacturing, or women's work has not received sufficient policy support.

The north-south divide We show that young girls' unemployment is much higher than for young men. However, there is a real north-south divide, as highlighted in the book, India Out of Work. What is achievable is demonstrated by Tamil Nadu, which has been one of India's fastest-growing States. More than 40% of India's women factory workers are employed in Tamil Nadu.

This is remarkable, given that Tamil Nadu accounts for only about 5%-6% of India's population. This concentration is driven primarily by the State's strong presence in textiles and garments (especially in Tiruppur and Coimbatore), footwear, electronics assembly (Sriperumbudur), and automobiles and auto components, as well as by higher female literacy, greater mobility, and well-developed hostel and transport facilities for women workers. Similarly, Hindi-belt States need to invest in the health (not insurance-based) and public education for all, especially of girls and women, to reduce higher-than-African level malnutrition and stunting rates  -  as the Southern states have done.

They can then also see similar outcomes. There is no chance for India being 'Viksit' without gender equality in all dimensions, especially in north India. Some increase of female WPR (who re-entered agriculture) across India since 2020 was due to older adult women engaging in animal husbandry and poultry farming  -  a welcome development for household incomes.

However, what about educated young girls? The gross enrolment rate at the secondary level was universalised between 2010 and 2015, with gender parity achieved even in rural Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. However, educated young women face high and rising unemployment rates. Worse, the number of young women (aged 15-29 years) who were neither looking for work nor in education, was under 70 million until 2004.
