Category: Editorial
Title: A missed opportunity to guarantee minimum Part One

A missed opportunity to guarantee minimum wages

The VB-G RAM G Act is a missed opportunity to correct serious anomalies in the determination of wage rates for MGNREGA workers There has been a lively debate in the last few months about the respective merits of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) and Viksit Bharat - Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin) Act, or VB-G RAM G Act for short. Absent from this debate, however, is a critical issue that haunts both Acts: wage rates. A key parameter The wage rate is a critical parameter of employment guarantee.

A relatively high wage rate can create a lot of enthusiasm among workers, as it happened in the early days of MGNREGA. And, enthusiasm is important for the success of the programme. Conversely, wage suppression can easily be used to restrain the programme or even phase it out over time. Wage rates, in any case, also have a strong influence on programme costs.

The wage rates of MGNREGA workers are determined under Section 6 of the Act. This section has two parts. The first part, Section 6(1), empowers the central government to notify MGNREGA wage rates. Different rates can be notified for different "areas", and in practice, this has come to mean different States.

Section 6(2) states that until such time as the central government notifies wage rates under Section 6(1), State-specific minimum wages apply. More precisely, MGNREGA workers are entitled to the minimum wage notified by the State government for agricultural labourers. MGNREGA came into force on February 2, 2006.

Until 2009, the central government abstained from notifying wages under Section 6(1). Therefore, State-specific minimum wages applied. In many States, minimum wages for agricultural labourers were higher than market wages at that time. This is one reason why MGNREGA was so popular in those days. In some States, there were significant increases in minimum wages between 2006 and 2009.

The most notable instance was a sharp increase in the minimum wage in Uttar Pradesh in 2007-8 (when Ms. Mayawati was Chief Minister), from ₹58 to ₹100 per day. Some observers argued that State governments were indulging in unrestrained increases in minimum wages because MGNREGA wages were fully paid by the central government.

Others countered that State governments had to pay the same wage on their own public works, and that this would be a restraining factor. They also argued that, except in Uttar Pradesh, there was little evidence of sharp increases in minimum wages. The jury was still out on this when, in late 2009, the central government pressed the panic button and notified MGNREGA wage rates under Section 6(1).

In the short term, this led to a further increase in wages, as the central government notified ₹100 per day in most States, with a top-up in States where the minimum wage was above that norm. This was sold as a pro-worker move, in pursuance of a promise made by the Congress Party in the run-up to the 2009 general election. Over time, however, this move enabled the central government to moderate the growth of MGNREGA wages.

In fact, the central government froze MGNREGA wages in real terms from then on. To this day, wages are raised State-wise every year to the extent of price increases (based on the Consumer Price Index for Agricultural Labourers), but not more. Real-wage freeze consequences This real-wage freeze rapidly led to two serious issues.
