Category: Editorial
Title: A missed opportunity to guarantee minimum Part Two

A missed opportunity to guarantee minimum wages

First, MGNREGA wages started lagging behind minimum wages in many States, as minimum wages rose in real terms but MGNREGA wages did not. By 2025-26, the MGNREGA wage rate was lower  -  often much lower  -  than the minimum wage of agricultural labourers in most States, according to a recent analysis by Laavanya Tamang. This defeats an important purpose of MGNREGA: sustaining minimum wages.

It also raises the question whether it is at all legal for the government to pay MGNREGA workers less than the minimum wage (this matter was taken up in the Supreme Court of India but was not clearly settled). The other issue is that MGNREGA wages also started lagging behind market wages. Between 2009 and 2014, real wages were rising quite rapidly in rural India, partly because MGNREGA was tightening the labour market.

By 2014, the ratio of MGNREGA wage rate to agricultural wage was around 60% for men and 75% for women at the all-India level, according to Labour Bureau data. The gap maintained itself from then on, as rural wage rates stagnated in real terms. The real gap is actually much bigger than it looks. The reason is that market wages are not only higher than MGNREGA wages but also (generally) paid on time  -  often the same day.

MGNREGA wages, by contrast, are often paid after long and uncertain delays. The central government keeps denying this, but the evidence is clear, notably from recent studies by the LibTech group. In fact, not only are there delays, sometimes, MGNREGA wages are not paid at all, for example due to technical failures of the Aadhaar-based Payment System or National Mobile Monitoring System.

The result is a tremendous "discouragement effect"  -  many rural workers have lost interest in MGNREGA. The absence of any marked decline in MGNREGA employment generation levels may seem to contradict this. A recent analysis of Periodic Labour Force Survey data, however, suggests that MGNREGA employment levels are in fact much lower today than they were in the early years of all-India implementation, contrary to official statistics.

The growing gap between official statistics and actual employment seems to reflect a major increase in leakages in the same period. The discouragement effect and the resurgence of corruption are integrally related. When workers lose interest, there is no vigilance. Worse, workers may be tempted to cooperate with corrupt elements instead of working by the rules.

Continuing policy failure Unfortunately, the VB-G RAM G Act is all set to perpetuate this crisis. For one thing, it does not contain any new, constructive provisions that might help to ensure the timely payment of wages or to curb corruption. For another, it continues to empower the central government to determine wage rates (under Section 10), even as the rationale for this has vanished.

Remember, the argument for an early switch from Section 6(2) to Section 6(1) under MGNREGA was that, when wages are fully paid by the central government, they should not be determined by the State government. Under the VB-G RAM G Act, however, wage costs are shared 60:40 between Centre and States. There was every reason to drop MGNREGA's Section 6(1) from the VB-G RAM G Act and revert to the principle of Section 6(2): guaranteed payment of minimum wages.
