Category: Editorial
Title: A potential TrumpXiPutin summit is casting a Part Two

A potential Trump-Xi-Putin summit is casting a shadow over BRICS

Beijing uses rare earths, market access and its control of important supply chains as leverage. Xi will continue to press Trump to reduce American support for Taiwan. Trump might be tempted to treat Asian security questions as part of a larger bargain with Xi. Meanwhile, the Kremlin has confirmed that Putin and Xi discussed a possible trilateral meeting with Trump at the APEC summit in Shenzhen in November.

For many, the idea of a "G3" will seem outlandish. But Trump has shown interest in it and explored the possibility of such a meeting last summer, during the 80th anniversary of the end of World War II. A G3 global directorate is not imminent. Russia and China are closer than ever and share concerns about the US.

But both also seek a reasonable relationship with Washington. For all their anti-Western rhetoric, both claim a place at the high table with the US. Russia was once part of the G8, the group of Western industrial states, and engaged directly with NATO. China now sees itself as America's peer. Both Russia and China lay claim to shaping the global order established after 1945.

A Trump-Xi-Putin summit could mark the beginning of triangular global leadership as a successor to the Yalta System that produced the UN Security Council and the five-power concert. For an Indian strategic community that jumps at the thought of a G-2, the idea of a G-3 will generate even greater political anxiety. Despite promoting BRICS and celebrating multipolarity in partnership with Moscow and Beijing, Delhi might find itself excluded from the new three-cornered table.

There are three answers to a potential G3 world for India. The first is internal reform and accelerated economic development. Second, Delhi should stop confusing multipolarity with anti-American bloc politics. Russia and China use BRICS to expand their diplomatic options while preserving the freedom to negotiate with Washington.

India must approach the emerging order with the same realism. Third, India must intensify its bilateral and minilateral cooperation with the Anglosphere, Brazil, Europe, Japan, Korea, and other middle powers that have no enthusiasm for a G3 world. As India's work in BRICS continues, its place in the changing global architecture will depend on how rapidly it builds national power and how deeply it develops partnerships beyond BRICS.

Written by: C. Raja Mohan The writer is a contributing editor on international affairs for The Indian Express. He is also associated with the Motwani Jadeja Institute of American Studies at the Jindal Global University and the Council on Strategic and Defense Research
