Category: Editorial
Title: A policy of caution Part Two

A policy of caution

Finally, on market development, the participant base of the term money market is proposed to be expanded to include non-bank participants-namely all India financial institutions, non-banking financial companies, and housing finance companies with enhanced limits for specified public deposits. Since banks are net lenders, the move is positive as it expands the demand for funds and deployment of intraday surplus funds. This is largely expected to have a softening impact on yields.

As emphatically iterated by the RBI governor, the rapid depreciation thrust on the INR of late is not in sync with India's macro fundamentals and a course correction was a much-needed remedy with currency now retreating towards its implied value. As a balancing act, the governor also clarified that the present set of currency-supporting measures are not permanent as the central bank remains prudently committed to curbing higher volatility without targeting any specific level. However, over a longer period, two things are self-evident from the present fiasco.

First, the rupee will remain subservient to India's balance-of-payments position and counterintuitive steps on this front are a sine qua non, just as liquidity measures smoothing the market ecosystem. Second, if India wishes to attract long-term patient capital (much preferred across both foreign direct investment and foreign portfolio investment routes) as also hot money, a broad set of investors would continue to explore hedging options that demand a vibrant suite of structures. Similarly, for an emerging market, targeted forex intervention remains an absolute necessity, a testament to the central bank's equaliser status.

The question now is, can we pitch GIFT City as a credible alternative to global financial centres with fewer compliance and regulatory hurdles that dissuade the vicious loop and biases impacting a downward outlook on rupee? Finally, we quantified the information in the policy text using natural language processing techniques and created a score using our custom-made dictionary. Out of the eight statements by the current governor since he assumed office, this is the most cautious in our opinion.

But it does not mean a rate hike is imminent. The choice of words and the latent signal of the statement reflect a deep understanding of the evolving global geo-economic situation without hinting at any imminent rate hike as the regulatory gaze negotiates growth and inflationary concerns. By Soumya Kanti Ghosh, Member, 16th Finance Commission, member, Economic Advisory Council to the PM, and Group Chief Economic Advisor, State Bank of India
