Category: Editorial
Title: A policy of caution Part One

A policy of caution

RBI reflects deep understanding of geo-economic realities without hinting at any imminent rate hike As the Monetary Policy Committee's (MPC) decision to keep the repo rate unchanged was largely anticipated, the broader market was watching out for the undertone and reading between the lines in the backdrop of the evolving situation in West Asia and its implications for growth and inflation. The economy is confronted with a supply shock, and a conscious and careful watch obviously remains the best course of action at present. The outlook for domestic growth for FY27, at 6.9%, remains optimistic, with gradual recovery projected in the second half of the current fiscal.

Elevated energy and other commodity prices along with disruptions in the Strait of Hormuz (in sync with the precarious position of shattered regional production capacities, chiefly gas and other input materials) may act as a drag on various domestic output capacities. The supply shock is expected to be largely inflationary, but the assessment so far is that it will stay within the target band of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) with a FY27 forecast at 4.6%. The development of El Niño conditions has been a concern, and if the adverse weather conditions coincide with a prolonged conflict the double jeopardy can be more significant in FY27.

On regulatory and development policies, the former measures have mostly focused on the banking sector. The RBI has proposed to rationalise two guidelines that affect the capital planning of banks. The first proposal is to remove the rider on deviation in incremental non-performing assets by 25% for taking quarterly profits while calculating the capital to risk-weighted assets ratio.

This proposal gives considerable flexibility to banks to plough back internally. The second proposal is to dispense with the requirement of investment fluctuation reserve (IFR)-an additional reserve under tier-II to cover losses on the non-held-to-maturity investment book. With banks already covering these losses under market risk capital charge and other income recognition provisions, IFR was a duplication in some sense.

The proposal irons this out and makes risk recognition more transparent and simpler. Also, back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest Indian commercial banks can find IFR of `35,000-40,000 crore getting freed up through a reversal (@2.5 high-frequency trading and FVTPL-AFS [fair value through profit or loss-available for sale]) portfolios of around a `14-lakh crore book, presuming a straightjacketed ~20% of bank investment book of about `70 lakh crore). This money can be used optimally and judiciously by banks to further boost Common Equity Tier-1, while possibly having a cascading effect on profit and loss account too although yields have moved up substantially last quarter.

To strengthen governance with optimal utilisation of time, it is proposed that board-level activity governed by RBI directions will be rationalised with more strategy and risk governance. That should make boards more attuned to strategy and policy formulations, a prerequisite in these tumultuous times. On the supervision side, the RBI has further consolidated 64 Master Directions in nine functional areas, thus reducing compliance costs for banks.

On payment systems, it is proposed to dispense with the required due diligence of micro, small, and medium enterprises while onboarding on the Trade Receivables Discounting System platform. This measure is expected to further increase trading volumes on the platform and offer liquidity to the sector. Banks and regulators would, however, need to identify risks proactively.
