Category: Editorial
Title: A rate cut was actually needed Part Two

A rate cut was actually needed

With a 5.3 per cent year-to-date (YTD) dropvis-à-visUS dollar, the rupee is headed for its sharpest annual decline since 2022, making it Asia's worst-performing currency so far this year. What makes this decline particularly noticeable are the facts that the nominal index of the US dollar has declined from the high seen at the beginning of 2025 and that the current real effective rate of the rupee based on both the 40-currency and the 6-currency baskets indicate its significant undervaluation at present  - a phenomenon not witnessed for a long time. On similar occasions in the past, the RBI would be reticent to slash the policy rate and also to induct sizeable durable liquidity as it intends to do now.

Hence, a feeling is gaining ground that a weaker rupee is a tactical response of the authorities to cushion external uncertainties that continue to pose downside risks to the country's growth outlook, in general, and to mitigate the impact of headwinds being faced by merchandise exports, in particular. Scorecard of FIT In the lead up to the completion of the first ten years of the flexible inflation target (FIT) framework for monetary policy formulation in India in March 2016, a formal review thereof by the RBI was announced in August this year, for the purposes of which public feedback has been sought on five questions that have been framed in this regard. The first one is "Whether headline inflation or core inflation would best guide the conduct of monetary policy, given evolving relative dynamics of food and core inflation and the continuing high weight of food in the CPI basket?" This issue has gained importance during the last 12 months as the downward trajectory of headline CPI inflation mimicked the sharp fall in food inflation during the same period: Food inflation was 8.4 per cent in December 2024, while CPI inflation was 5.22 per cent.

Ten months later, in October, 2025, headline inflation fell to 0.25 per cent, driven by a dramatic fall in food inflation to (-) 5.02 per cent. The core inflation during this period remained relatively sticky at around 3.5 per cent. Based on these and other relevant facts, a pertinent question has been raised: is there sufficient evidence to conclude a causal link between changes in the policy rate and the headline inflation remaining within 4+/-2 per cent band?

A corollary to this question is whether the FIT regime so far has been able to anchor inflationary expectations adequately. These issues need to be pursued further through rich analysis and empirical investigation. As regards whether the tolerance band for inflation should be based on headline inflation or core inflation, all the relevant arguments favour the continuance of headline inflation.

One hopes that the evaluation currently underway will strengthen the FIT framework. By Himadri Bhattacharya The writer is a former central banker and a consultant to the IMF) (Through The Billion Press)
