Category: Editorial
Title: A rate cut was actually needed Part One

A rate cut was actually needed

The real rates of interest are too high for economic agents to be efficient The Monetary Policy Committee's decision to cut the policy rate by 25 basis points to 5.25 per cent, on the conclusion of its last bi-monthly meeting of 2025 on December 5, was contrary to the 'consensus' opinion of a few senior bankers and also the majority opinion of a panel of economists polled earlier in this regard. However, this latest cut in the rate was not wholly unexpected, given the sharp drop in CPI inflation to an all-time low of 0.25 per cent in October, 2025. Expectedly, the equity market welcomed the cut, with the Sensex jumping 300 points in the immediate aftermath of the policy release.

The yield on the 10-year G-Sec benchmark eased a little bit, possibly because of the announcement of OMO purchases of G-Secs of ₹1.5 lakh crore to be held in two doses later in this month. Similarly, the dollar/rupee forward premia softened on the announcement of a 3-year buy-sell swap of $5 billion slated for December 16. Growth and inflation outlook The MPC has altered the forecast of growth and inflation in this policy: real GDP growth for 2025-26 is now projected at 7.3 per cent, which is higher than 6.8 per cent that was projected in the last bi-monthly policy.

CPI inflation for 2025-26 is now projected lower at 2 per centvis-à-vis2.6 per cent projected in the last bi-monthly meeting. Incidentally, similar alterations in growth and inflation were made in the last bi-monthly policy as well. Although there is nothing wrong in making alterations in macroeconomic forecasts in the light of new information and data, it is necessary to make sure that the forecasts do not become too adaptive.

To be sure, the RBI has a robust forecasting framework, with necessary checks and balances. But a comprehensive performance review thereof is called for. In the wake of the release of growth numbers for Q1 and Q2 of this fiscal year, a pertinent debate has ensued as to whether and to what extent the higher-than-expected growth performance, particularly in Q2 at 8.2 per cent reflects structural changes taking place in the economy, pushing outward its 'production possibility frontier'.

This debate is helpful, as it would strengthen the case for further meaningful reforms by Central and State governments, particularly in the agricultural sector. One hopes that the three farm laws which were repealed in the past under political and security considerations will be revived in some form or the other. In the light of the headline inflation dropping below 2 per cent as per its latest print and the continuance of high real interest rate in India, a policy rate cut was needed.

Buoyant growth numbers cannot hide the fact that both producers and consumers suffer from high real rates, which would still be above 3 per cent after the rate cut. Rate cut amid rupee depreciation The rupee has been under significant selling pressure in recent months, linked to FPI outflows and sluggish merchandise exports growth. It slipped to an all-time low of ₹90.28 per US dollar on December 3.
