Category: Editorial
Title: A shade of dark On the Transgender Persons

A shade of dark: On the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Amendment Bill, 2026

Persons (Protection of Rights) Amendment Bill, 2026 A reassessment of the framework governing rights of transgender persons is due Bulldozing a Bill through Parliament and pushing it into law while ignoring the public outcry is verily a failure of the democratic process. The way the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Amendment Bill, 2026 was rushed through both Houses of Parliament  -  amid Opposition walkouts and a storm of protests by the LGBTQIA+ communities  -  is condemnable. There was neither a transparent consultative process during the drafting of the Bill nor an informed discussion on its various aspects in Parliament.

While the Bill was framed as an effort to correct past legislative shortcomings, there is an apprehension among stakeholders that it applied a heteronormative lens to a law intended to address complex issues of gender identity and human dignity. The Bill explicitly states: "The purpose was and is not to protect each and every class of persons with various gender identities, self-perceived sex/gender identities or gender fluidities..." This stance has left many within the community uncertain regarding their legal standing. By moving away from broader definitions, the Bill has altered the legal landscape established by previous judicial precedents, such as the NALSA vs Union of India judgment.

True, concerns have been raised about possible misuse of allowing self-perceived gender identities for those seeking to avail of public facilities and government benefits earmarked for transgender persons. But, in the attempt to do away with the contentious issue of self-identification of gender without certification by a medical board, it shifts the focus toward mandatory biological markers  -  including chromosomes, hormones, and genitalia  -  or specific socio-cultural communities such as kinner, aravani, hijra or jogta. Moreover, it is problematic to conflate the distinct concepts of sex and gender as done in the Bill.

In effect, the Bill reduces the psychological and socio-cultural markers of gender to biological characteristics. Only those identifiably within the specified set of socio-cultural communities escape the stipulations of the legislation. Despite these concerns, the government has maintained that the Act reflects a "collective conscience", even as stakeholders suggest that the move limits existing protections instead of expanding them.

Effective governance mandates engagement in consultation with all stakeholders. To address the current protests by members of the LGBTQIA+ communities, the government must return to a collaborative approach and move toward a rights-based law developed through a transparent consultative process. A new legislative proposal should aim to guarantee the equality of every citizen under the law, incorporate the perspectives of the LGBTQIA+ communities, and provide legal clarity while ensuring dignity for all.

Otherwise, the government would appear to have created new problems in solving an old one.
