Category: Editorial
Title: A silent resolve in tax policy Part Two

A silent resolve in tax policy

The government should consider removing the additional surcharge as the overarching aim should remain a seamless transition to the new, simpler tax regime. That will led to greater tax buoyancy without worrying about a "points-based" loss of revenue due to the dividend tax exemption. Moreover, conditions requiring investment funds to have fund managers in India are now relaxed.

Since liberalisation, the classic fund management structure adopted by PE/VC firms involved having both the fund entity and the fund management entity located outside India, even when 100% of the investments were made in Indian firms. The favourable capital gains tax treatment in treaties with countries like Singapore and Mauritius were also strong factors for such PE/VC firms to structure their funds in these jurisdictions along with the fund management entities. However, with the amendments in tax treaties as well as the reintroduction of capital gains tax in India, the attractiveness of localising these entities in jurisdictions like Singapore and Mauritius has diminished.

Despite these developments, most funds continued to have fund management companies outside India for lack of tax certainty. The offshore fund itself would not be considered as having a taxable presence in India. This was the context in which Section 9A of the (old) Income Tax Act attempted to provide tax certainty.

However, due to a plethora of conditions in the said provision, hardly any PE/VC firm chose to relocate fund management operations to India. The current amendments are the most ambitious ever attempted, as they seek to remove the number of conditions (from 13 to just five) for the funds to be eligible for such exemption from any business tax outcome in India. Hopefully, PE/VC firms will now shed their reluctance and confidently relocate their fund management operations.

The amendments are a reminder of the government's silent resolve to continue transformative reforms in tax policy and facilitate foreign investments to support India's journey to Viksit Bharat by 2047. The stakeholders must take advantage of these measures and accelerate their investments in India. Written by Sudhir Kapadia
