Category: Editorial
Title: A taste of tactical diplomacy Part Two

A taste of tactical diplomacy

The Philippines has expanded military access for US forces. South Korea and Japan have deepened security cooperation despite old political strains. And even before "Ukraine", the creation of AUKUS (2021) by the Biden administration marked the deepening of defence cooperation between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the US, especially on nuclear issues.

From Beijing's viewpoint, the significance of these developments extends beyond any single summit. Therefore, America is no longer the only challenge faced by China. An increasingly integrated coalition of allies could be a stronger threat. Their coalition-based military architecture could menace China.

But the countries involved in stronger military collaboration see themselves as defending themselves against China's expansionism. Trump obviously didn't wish to raise China's hackles on Taiwan, which, for Beijing, is the most important issue in China-US relations. Xi drew the red line over Taiwan and advised the US to handle the issue carefully.

Before Xi's arrival, Trump dismissed talk of a military conflict on Taiwan with the words that Washington was not looking for a war 9,500 miles away from America. He was silent on a promised defence deal with Taipei after Xi's departure from Washington. Overall, the personal force of a Xi-Trump meeting should not be underestimated.

For, America and China are at the centre of global politics. Countries weaker than the US and China will not be able to counter them. Instead, they will accept any so-called "rules" made by Washington and Beijing in the name of world peace. The Trump-Xi summit could create an informal, personal bilateral power structure that could result in world-influencing decisions taken by Washington and Beijing.

Those decisions, as China's Global Times opines, have nothing to with a rules-based or multilateral order, nor do they necessarily serve anyone else's interests. Instead, the summit is a highly tactical head-of-state diplomacy which will affect the world for at least the next 24-plus months, as long as Trump is president. Countries weaker than China and America should be on the alert as Trump and Xi plan to meet again this year  -  at the APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) summit in China, and the G20 summit in the US.

Yet, at the same time, these two leaders are seriously constrained by the challenges posed by the rivalry between their countries. In the long run, neither China nor the US will unilaterally frame the global order according to their whims  -  they will also have to keep in mind the need for the world's stability, security, and peace. By Anita Inder Singh The writer is Founding Professor, Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution.
