Category: Editorial
Title: A tale of Two revised price indices Part Two

A tale of 2 'revised' price indices

Third, the structure and composition of Indian economy have changed dramatically post liberalisation. How then have the WPI weights remained so stable during the past three decades (Chart 1)? It is plausible that broad macroeconomic proportions, such as the relative dominance of manufactured items versus primary articles, evolve gradually over the medium term.

However, the stable weights witnessed since 1990s is both surprising and counter-intuitive. CPI revision The CPI series updation was far more anticipated and watched by both individuals and market participants. It was the first revision after the RBI adopted a flexible inflation targeting approach in 2016 using CPI inflation as the nominal anchor.

The new series adopts the Classification of Individual Consumption According to Purpose (COICOP 2018), replacing the earlier structure comprising six broad groups. The revised weights reflect updated household expenditure patterns as captured in the HCES 2023-24. At the all-India level, the number of weighted items has increased from 299 to 358.

Within this, goods items have increased from 259 to 308, while services items have increased from 40 to 50: some of the pertinent newer items include rural housing, online media or streaming services, value-added dairy products, barley and its products, pen drives and external hard disks, babysitting services and exercise equipment. Importantly, in terms of price collection, e-commerce prices have been introduced as an additional market in 12 large towns with populations exceeding 25 lakh. In the new series, the share of food and beverages has declined from 45.86 per cent to 36.75 per cent, though it continues to remain the largest component in the CPI basket (Chart 2).

However, a close reading of the CPI revision document as well as the HCES 2023- 24 reveal that the new CPI weightage, particularly for food, does not capture the changes in consumption due to online purchases. This may result in the food weight and food inflation being underestimated in the new CPI. If the CPI continues to underestimate food inflation, then the divergence of inflation between the two series is not unexpected even for common items.

Effect on GDP In India's new GDP series (base year 2022 - 23), the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) uses the HCES 2022-23 as a direct national benchmark to track item-wise Private Final Consumption Expenditure (PFCE) and reshape quarterly distribution patterns. However, as stated earlier, HECS 2022-23 does not capture consumption from online purchases. As online purchases are increasingly shaping consumption, are we underestimating consumption/GDP to that extent?

It may so happen that the effect of unprecedented increase in UPI transactions is still not captured in the nominal GDP. While earlier we were concerned that GDP not appropriately capturing the informal/unorganised sector, there is now an increasing unease of missing economic transactions coming from the formal sector, too. This has direct implications for both GDP and inflation (Das and Roy Trivedi, April 17, 2026, businessline).

So, even with new base revisions, are we underestimating both output and inflation? By Abhiman Das & Smita Roy Trivedi Das is ICICI Bank Chair Professor, IIM Ahmedabad, Trivedi is Associate Professor, National Institute of Bank Management. Views are personal
