Category: Editorial
Title: A taste of tactical diplomacy Part One

A taste of tactical diplomacy

President Trump warmly welcomed China's President Xi Jinping, signaling tentative cooperation on trade, AI, and Taiwan amid ongoing US-China competition and strategic rivalries impacting global politics. The warm welcome extended by President Donald Trump to China's President Xi Jinping and his wife, the singer Peng Liyuan, augured happy personal relationships and well as a reduction of Sino-US differences on trade, artificial intelligence (AI), and Taiwan. The trade agreement signed in South Korea in October 2025 until November 10 was extended until January 2027.

But Trump's hospitality, which made Xi and his wife feel "truly at home", could not disguise the fierce competition between America and China for global clout as they see themselves as the world's two great countries. China's export-led economy was high on the agenda. China's exports rose by 25% over the last year.

That increase was driven mostly by a weakening yuan and global AI demand. Since this has given China leverage, Washington has accused Beijing of deliberately maintaining trade imbalances. In fact, related to trade is America's wish to restrict China's development of AI. As several American businessmen recently called for an AI slowdown that China suspects is meant to contain its rise, the state-steered China Daily accused America's leading AI companies using calls for a slowdown to "blunt China's AI advance".

Although Trump hailed AI as the next Industrial Revolution or Internet, and predicted that it could account for 25% of America's GDP, Washington and Beijing mistrust each other. Because neither wants to slow down, in Trump's words, whoever wins AI, wins! He has even aired the ideas of an "AI Force" and an "AI Czar".

The priority given to trade was clear as China's Vice Premier, He Lifeng, spent four days in Washington before Xi's arrival and Trump happily announced that several trade deals were on the cards. Yet, the result of the summit was more about a trade armistice than crafting a grand reset of trade and investment strategies. Neither side has announced trade breakthroughs or significant deals on agriculture or Boeing jets.

Generally, Trump prefers incremental agreements to maintain tariff leverage over Beijing. On another plane, since China possesses some 70% of the world's critical minerals and rare earths, America seeks access to rare-earth elements while trying to prevent China from using export controls as leverage as it dominates global critical mineral refining which is essential for both AI and the energy transition. Restrictions on rare-earth exports have become one of the most contested issues between Washington and Beijing, as China wants assurances that the US will not misuse export controls.

At the security level, the summit's broader strategic significance was determined by what it signalled to America's allies, including Japan, the Philippines, and South Korea, who had been keeping an eye on Xi's visit to Washington. They are concerned about a major shift in the international security environment. For, contemporary US-China relations cannot be understood through the bilateral lens of the Cold War.

Coalitions, rather than individual states, appear to be shaping the balance of power in the Indo-Pacific, especially as Trump's America looks unreliable as a bulwark against China. For example, Japan gave up its post-World War II pacifism and embarked on full militarisation following Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine. "Ukraine today might be East Asia tomorrow", warned the former Japanese premier, Fumio Kishida, at the time, in an obvious reference to Taiwan.
