Category: Editorial
Title: A watershed moment in Indias defence posture Part One

A watershed moment in India's defence posture

Ia's defence posture India's strategic doctrine has evolved sharply after Operation Sindoor Operation Sindoor commenced at 1:05 a.m. on May 7, 2025, with a surgical, high-intensity destruction of selected terrorist infrastructure. This strike was a direct and decisive response to the cowardly Pahalgam carnage orchestrated by cross-border terrorists on April 22, 2025.

This operation represents a paradigm shift in India's politico-military mindset and doctrine, marking a watershed moment in its approach to national security. New era Indian doctrine India's historical posture of "reactive restraint" provided a strong rationale for a "dossier approach", in which military inaction was often portrayed as extraordinary restraint and was frequently encouraged and lauded by the West. "What if" loops about attacking terror targets in a nuclear-armed adversary provided the final blow to India's decision-makers.

Post-Operation Sindoor, the "zero tolerance" policy declared by Prime Minister Narendra Modi was pivotal further and reinforced, whereby any act of cross-border terrorism would be considered an "act of war". This reflects a leadership that possesses both the strategic resolve to act and the absolute confidence in the armed forces to deliver retribution. Despite the political risks, this extraordinary resolve to tackle terror head on  -  and the refusal to submit to nuclear blackmail and external pressure drew new red lines.

Operation Sindoor defined a new chapter in India's defence evolution too. While on the transition to integration and restructuring, this Operation tested the ground realities of the three services  -  the Indian Air Force (IAF), the Indian Navy and the Indian Army. Post Pahalgam, the forces were tuned to expect a clear-cut political directive for action, which came in an unambiguous form and was perhaps stronger than what the services had anticipated.

The services were given a free hand. The resultant Indian strikes on nine terrorist targets were exceptionally well-integrated across the three services, achieving total success despite a fully alert Pakistan. The choice of Bahawalpur, and Muridke in Pakistan as targets was unthinkable. Pakistan and the world woke up to realities of the "new normal".

Pictures and videos of the massive destruction at these terror hubs, and the sheer scale and success of the strikes, were stunning. The highly calibrated and intelligent Indian response over the next two days was executed well, calmly but firmly. Pakistan clearly misread India's resolve. On May 9 and 10, when the Pakistan Air Force attempted to strike some of India's critical high-value assets, the Indian Air Force countered it in near real time with waves of airstrikes hitting 11 bases across Pakistan, including Nur Khan, Sargodha, Murid and Bholari.

The level of precise targeting and extent of damage achieved could not have been imagined by Pakistan. The global defence analytical community acknowledges this as one of the most defining and concise actions against a nuclear-armed nation. Military audaciousness at its best This total, integrated and calibrated response, characterised by masterful control of the escalation ladder, reflects the seamless synergy between India's civil and military institutions.

In my opinion, India's achievement could not have been better. After 88 hours of Operation Sindoor, by noon on May 10, Pakistan was reeling from massive destruction at 11 bases by the IAF. Karachi was nervously monitoring Indian naval deployments poised for action, while aggressive Indian Army operations along the Line of Control and the International Border had rendered drone attacks unviable.
