Category: Editorial
Title: A watershed moment in Indias defence posture Part Two

A watershed moment in India's defence posture

A robust, networked air-defence system, including the S-400 missile system had completely denied airspace not only over Indian territory but also deep inside Pakistan. Pakistan had no choice but to rush and request a ceasefire. Given the dynamics and complications of escalation control under a nuclear overhang, India's Chief of Defence Staff and the Service Chiefs deserve high praise for the ferocious targeting on May 10 and the brilliant seizing of the escalation opportunity to coerce a termination.

This was military audaciousness at its very best. The Indian armed forces responded in full measure to the political mandate, leaving no doubt regarding the nation's capacity for rapid, high-impact operation. The sheer scale and speed of India's action on May 10 was watched with awe across the country.

The announcement of the ceasefire was too sudden for the public at large. You cannot blame the people asking for more. One cannot view these developments with emotion. Having achieved all objectives and the scope of action on May 10, the termination decision was perfectly timed. Operation Sindoor's ongoing status carries a powerful strategic signal.

Undoubtedly, the primary signal is for terrorists to remain in hiding and for their backers to desist. The message also extends to the Pakistani citizenry  -  a stark and constant reminder of the reckless involvement of part of their military leadership. In the age of global digital transparency and expert strategic analysis, the truth of these events cannot be shielded from their people for long.

They must now confront the realities of a military regime camouflaged by a political facade and "regime" change should be on their minds. Accelerate indigenous defence growth Ongoing operations have implications for India as well. The defence forces would need to maintain a high state of readiness to act.

After the opening round of Operation Sindoor, the expectations are high. I am sure the services are working proactively to deliver. An equally important implication is for the defence industry to ramp up in real terms to achieve Atmanirbharta. The focus must be to "Innovate, Design, and Manufacture" at scale.

The government has focused hugely on reforms to energise the public and private industry in defence, aerospace, space, cyber and Artificial Intelligence domains. The stellar performance of indigenous systems during Operation Sindoor has invigorated India's innovation and startup ecosystem. I have always maintained that the real responsibility for being the "agent of change" rests with the Defence Research and Development Organisation laboratories, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, and, to some extent, even on large industry players already in the system.

They no longer have the option to delay and must immediately focus on truly integrating the entire private sector, including micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and startups, into an indigenous ecosystem through a "whole-of-nation" approach. There is an urgent need to capitalise on this golden period of governance and reforms, and the unpredictable geopolitical environment reinforces the need to double down on true Atmanirbharta. Ultimately, the "Modi redlines" regarding cross-border terrorism are permanent.

This new normal is irreversible and will define India's strategic mindset for the foreseeable future. The nation demands nothing less, and the populace would stand firmly behind the architects and executors of India's national security. My salute to everyone involved in the success of Operation Sindoor.

R.K.S. Bhadauria Former Air Chief Marshal and served as Chief of the Air Staff of the Indian Air Force
