Category: Editorial
Title: A wider SIR has momentum but it is still a Part One

A wider SIR has momentum but it is still a test case

It is still a test case An electoral roll that has been intensely revised must be accepted, and political parties and the Election Commission should focus on upholding the trust of the Indian voter The Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls has now rolled into another batch of States and Union Territories after creating a new electoral roll in Bihar, a State which is now in the midst of its elections. The Election Commission of India (ECI)-ordered SIR in nine States and three Union Territories, as part of a staggered pan-India exercise, began on November 4, 2025. Being held in Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat and the Union Territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep and Puducherry, this phase includes some States which go to the polls next year, but excludes Assam (also poll-going), where issues of citizenship are on a different legal track.

The post-enumeration draft roll will be released on December 9, 2025, while the final roll will be released on February 7, 2026. This is only the ninth SIR in India's 75-year-old electoral history and the first one after 21 years. In June 2025, the ECI had decided to commence intensive revision 'in the entire country', also confirming that the schedule for all States 'shall be issued separately' after dealing with the immediate demands of Bihar.

The ECI has ordered the respective governments to provide the workforce for SIR operations and not shift any officials connected with SIR work. No one size fits all Under this SIR, 51 crore electors will be brought under intensive review  -  more than half the country's total electorate, spreading over 321 districts and 1,843 Assembly constituencies. It will involve 5.33 lakh polling stations and an equal number of Booth Level Officers (BLOs) and over 7.64 lakh booth level agents of political parties  -  a number which should see an upsurge as parties would be keen to safeguard their interests.

No two elections in India's long history of 18 national and over 400 Assembly elections were the same. This applies equally to the SIR in terms of upcoming challenges. The current ruling dispensations in Tamil Nadu and Kerala have taken a dim view of the SIR. The responses from West Bengal, with 7.7 crore electors, have been more combative; it is also a State with a large number of constituencies bordering Bangladesh, where the issues of infiltration and citizenship are in focus.

Uttar Pradesh, with 15.44 crore electors, and social complexities will not be a cakewalk either. The burden of migrations that electoral roll managers faced in Bihar does not hold true in other States. The efficiency of past summary revisions could differ from State to State, determining the quantum of the task.

A statutory process such as a SIR has a certain uncompromising standardisation, but procedures may still require local customisation. A friendlier template Bihar was a tough assignment being the first SIR exercise after two decades, and which saw protests and doubts. The foundational lines have been drawn now.

Article 326 of the Constitution that defines an elector is getting highlighted as an equal truth as Article 324 in running elections. A SIR is legitimate but genuine electors need to be facilitated using a time frame that is adequate. Transparency levels should satisfy citizen and political party. The clear order from the ECI, that "No document is to be collected from electors during the Enumeration Phase", should be a respite for millions of ordinary voters who are apprehensive the moment the word 'document' is mentioned.
