Category: Editorial
Title: A wider SIR has momentum but it is still a Part Two

A wider SIR has momentum but it is still a test case

The draft roll will include all those whose signed enumeration forms, further rationalised and partly pre-filled, are received. Only those electors whose names could not be matched/linked with previous SIR will be notified and heard before the registration official who decides on either inclusion or exclusion. Three visits to the house of each elector by the BLO is reassuring.

The familiar Form 6 for new enrolment, Form 7 for deletion and Form 8 for correction will remain in place. Critics of the SIR have reasons to be satisfied with the modifications they could orchestrate; they should walk the next steps without grudge or imaginary fear. Electoral roll management, largely a technical exercise, becomes cluttered when it becomes an echo chamber for issues such as infiltration or disenfranchisement that are hyped.

The SIR is essentially a clean up exercise. The pan-India picture will hopefully not cause any shock this time. The bulk of exclusion will always come from death, absence, shifting or duplication. The SIR method is different but complementary to the ECI's innovative efforts in a mobilisation of voters for registration and turnout in recent years.

Voter turnout in the first phase of the Bihar election has proved this. The Supreme Court of India and other stakeholders have been concerned that the right of any voter should not be denied while trimming the flab. Under the SIR, BLOs have been specially directed to have at least 30 blank forms to facilitate the enrolment of new voters.

An issue past debate The SIR is a fait accompli and is past debate. An electoral roll that has been intensely revised is now a reality right up to polling day and the polling compartment. Political parties have changed their tune. From the 'Stop SIR' call, political parties are moving to make the best out of the exercise, even if they maintain their ideological opposition to it and still explore legal remedies.

If parties in Tamil Nadu, Kerala and West Bengal have genuine fears about the exclusion of eligible people even as they go ahead with poll preparation, they need to act. They need to participate in the implementation of the SIR and make use of the decentralised structure of checks and balances and grievance mitigation. More than the Supreme Court's sanction of the legitimacy of the SIR process, it is the 'zero appeals' in the Bihar process and field-level collaboration seen by party functionaries (notwithstanding political statements at the top) which will make election managers feel more confident in taking the SIR forward.

When asked about possible resistance from States such as West Bengal, the Chief Election Commissioner, Gyanesh Kumar, pointed to the architecture of constitutional roles and duties and hoped for its seamless working. While the fundamentals of the SIR have been validated, there will be hurdles in the execution in scale. It is here that the ECI will need to show skill and empathy.

The ECI's legacy of competence demands that it should work continuously to uphold the trust of voters. It won the trial in Bihar and the new pan-India SIR will be another test case. Akshay Rout is former Director General, Election Commission of India. The views expressed are personal
