Category: Editorial
Title: Advancing IndiaSouth Korea defence Part One

Advancing India-South Korea defence innovation ties

KIND-X can help deepen bilateral defence research and development, co-production, and start-up collaboration Since establishing diplomatic relations in 1973, India and South Korea have maintained defence ties. Their first formal agreement, the 2005 MoU on Defence Industry and Logistics, promoted cooperation in production, research and development, and procurement. Subsequently, they signed separate five-year memoranda of understanding on defence cooperation and defence research and development (R&D) in 2010.

The first enabled exchanges of expertise, training, visits and joint exercises, while the second focused on emerging technologies such as marine, electronics, and intelligent systems through links between India's Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and the South Korean defence industry. In 2015, the partnership was elevated to a Special Strategic Partnership. Furthermore, the 2020 Roadmap for Defence Industries Cooperation expanded engagements into key areas, such as land, naval, aero, and guided weapon systems, along with investments and technology transfer in India's defence industrial corridors.

A notable outcome of this partnership is the K9 Vajra-T self-propelled artillery system, manufactured in India by Larsen & Toubro (L&T) and Hanwha Aerospace, South Korea under the 'Make in India' initiative, whose success led to a follow-on production contract. The new platform On April 20, 2026, at the India-South Korea Summit between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Lee Jae Myung, a new defence innovation platform called the Korea-India Defence Accelerator (KIND-X) was announced. As part of the Joint Strategic Vision, KIND-X aims to connect businesses, incubators, investors, defence start-ups, and universities from both sides.

KIND- X is not a new model of cooperation for India. It mirrors similar defence industrial innovation bridges with the United States under INDUS-X (India-U.S. Defense Acceleration Ecosystem) and with France under FRIND-X (France-India Defence Startup Excellence). There have also been suggestions to create an INDUS-X-like model with South Korea.

Drawing on these existing models, KIND-X is expected to be led by South Korea's Defence Acquisition Programme Administration (DAPA) and India's Defence Innovation Organisation (DIO). Both countries run defence innovation programmes to strengthen their defence start-up ecosystems, such as South Korea's specialised innovation enterprise system and India's Innovations for Defence Excellence (iDEX). According to India's Ministry of External Affairs special briefing on April 20, 2024, KIND-X is expected to align with the 2020 Roadmap for Defence Industries Cooperation.

What can be unlocked What can KIND-X unlock? KIND-X can emerge as the "defence innovation bridge", expanding defence R&D, innovation, co-development and co-production, involving startups, investors, universities, academia, and think tanks, essentially creating a joint defence innovation and industrial ecosystem from both countries. This may involve release of joint challenges and grants by DAPA and DIO for their respective startups to innovate defence technologies in the areas envisaged under the 2020 road map.

It may facilitate access to testing facilities through universities and laboratories in both countries, promote joint certification and standardisation processes, and support accelerator and incubator programmes connecting investors and innovators from both sides. It may also include workshops to help stakeholders navigate each other's markets and production systems. These workshops can address export control regimes, funding models for defence production, and intellectual property and licensing requirements related to technology transfer for co-production and co-development.
