Category: Editorial
Title: Advancing IndiaSouth Korea defence Part Two

Advancing India-South Korea defence innovation ties

An annual summit, similar to the INDUS-X summit, could convene high-level representatives from defence ministries, industry, universities, think tanks, and academia in Seoul, New Delhi, and other industrial hubs. The KIND-X summit could also convene Track 1.5 dialogues to emphasise the strategic rationale for bilateral defence cooperation, foster networking, and periodically assess progress on deliverables under the initiative. The success of KIND-X will depend on leveraging existing co-production ventures such as the K9 Vajra-T howitzers by L&T and Hanwha Aerospace to create templates for future defence projects.

It will connect South Korea's innovation clusters in Changwon, Daejeon, and Gumi with India's defence corridors in Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh, and with aerospace hubs in Bengaluru, Chennai, and Hyderabad. Involving major firms such as Hyundai, L&T, Tata Advanced Systems Limited, Mahindra, Bharat Forge, Hanwha, LIG, and Kangnam, alongside start-ups and R&D ecosystems, can further expand linkages. As an innovation bridge The launch of KIND-X as a defence innovation bridge signals both governments' keenness to unlock their respective deep-tech innovation ecosystems to develop dual-use technologies.

With deepening ties across other strategic sectors such as shipbuilding, artificial intelligence, space, critical minerals, and semiconductors, KIND-X can complement and draw on convergences in these sectors for defence. Aligning with India's Defence Forces Vision 2047 and South Korea's Defence Innovation 4.0 strategy, and co-investing in emerging and future technologies will be key to making this initiative forward-looking. Potential areas under KIND-X include Artificial Intelligence platforms for military applications, autonomous weapon systems and robotics, joint development of satellites for space-based intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), Space Situational Awareness (SSA), communication and navigation, critical mineral supply chains, and defence semiconductor fabs.

Given both countries' growing defence exports, KIND-X can emerge as an important facilitator. The onus is now upon both defence ministries to curate tangible deliverables under KIND-X, clarifying its steering template, funding mechanisms and areas of joint innovation. By Tejas Bharadwaj (Senior research analyst in the Technology and Society Program at Carnegie India) & Mugdha Satpute (Research assistant in the Security Studies Program at Carnegie India)
