Category: Editorial
Title: AI is stepping into intimacy And it wont fix Part Two

AI is stepping into intimacy. And it won't fix the loneliness crisis

In response to increasing concerns, some responsible AI developers have introduced safeguards. These include intervention during chats, breaking character during conversations about self-harm, limiting long-term memory, and reminding users that they are interacting with machines rather than sentient beings. Some have restricted romantic role-play or enhanced restrictions for younger users.

However, these measures remain inconsistent, voluntary, and reactive. Most artificial intimacy service providers are naturally not incentivised to adopt these guardrails unless there is a litigation risk. If profit becomes the sole motive for such a delicate sector, we will increasingly see more dark patterns that manipulate user behaviour and choices, where people are drawn into emotional subscription traps.

There could be serious national security risks involved here, as well as emotional manipulation can also occur on a population scale, including for indoctrination or radicalisation. While deployers and developers react to this emergent situation, society has a crucial role to play. Stakeholders, including parents, caregivers, schools, and mental health professionals, have a role to play in identifying early warning signs, interventions, and spreading information about the harms of artificial intimacy.

Digital literacy should emphasise that responsiveness is not care, and that simulation is not reciprocity. Early drafts of India's data protection framework acknowledged emotional manipulation as a form of harm, which was later removed. The government should consider regulating dark patterns, including creating emotional dependence on artificial companionship and holding artificial intimacy service providers responsible for implementing safeguards to prevent harmful emotional manipulation.

They should be encouraged to adopt age-appropriate safety design principles that make artificial intimacy supplementary rather than substitutive. AI can truly help people practice interaction, cope with temporary loneliness, and access support, while preserving the primacy of human relationships. It can also serve as a supplement to therapy in a supervised environment.

The history is clear  -  when societies act early, harm can be mitigated. When they delay, the damage becomes the new norm. Artificial intimacy may be the new smoking  - it's up to us to act or face the consequences later. By Nikhil Narendran The writer is Partner at Trilegal
