Category: Editorial
Title: AI mania masks economic fissures and rising Part One

AI mania masks economic fissures and rising uncertainty

The AI frenzy is propelling markets to ever-new highs. The pressures and problems of the present are being ignored for the (yet untested) promise of the future. Markets may be priced to perfection. But reality rarely follows suit. The tone and tenor in Washington, DC on the sidelines of the recent IMF-World Bank meetings revealed how divided and uncertain the policy, investor and analyst community remains.

One would have presumed economic uncertainty would have peaked during the spring meetings in April, a few weeks after "Liberation Day". The uncertainty then was deep, but narrow, concentrated on the scale and scope of the Trump tariffs. Now it has broadened ominously. Is the US economy on the verge of a recession or has it bucked one?

Are the Trump tariffs even legal? Will the breathless AI build-out become progressively unviable? Are we playing with fiscal fire globally? Is the cherished independence of some central banks under existential threat? Start with US economic performance. The Atlanta Fed Nowcaster suggests US growth last quarter was tracking an eye-popping 3.9 per cent.

Far from a tariff-induced recession, US growth is accelerating! Tempting as it may be, it's too early to claim victory. Below strong headline growth lie caveats and fissures. First, surging AI investment has been responsible for much of recent growth. Absent that, US growth would have averaged just 1 per cent in the first half of 2025.

Second, the US labour market has come to a virtual stall, which is typically a precursor to a recession. Third, US inflation pressures continue to build as tariffs are slowly passed on to consumers, which, alongside slowing job growth, will put more pressure on households. But, given the conflicting signals, which is the signal and which is the noise?

Is the labour market about to break? Or are softer jobs numbers simply reflecting a much lower "breakeven rate" because of the anti-immigration efforts by the administration? Will the AI boom offset the tariff pressures and bail the economy out? And if so, will policymakers draw the wrong conclusion that tariffs were not harmful, prompting more to be rolled out?

Meanwhile, AI mania continues to grip the world. Global investments in "data centres" have jumped from $400 billion in 2024 to an estimated $600 billion in 2025 and are projected to rise to $3-4 trillion a year by 2030. It's understandable why mania will drive more mania. Some, like Nouriel Roubini, believe AI will result in exponential productivity growth, which, if true, will result in a winner-takes-all outcome.

So, the first-mover advantage becomes crucial. Further, as the Richmond Fed notes, current AI investment  -  when compared to the telecom boom of the 1990s  -  suggests it's early days yet. We may only be in the second inning of a nine-inning baseball game. Recognising this, the frenzy in the stock market is giddying.

Just 30 AI-related stocks now account for 44 per cent of the S&P's market capitalisation. But is the exuberance getting irrational? Eventually, AI investments of the kind envisaged will necessitate meaningful leverage. Will the use-cases be enough to justify these investment levels? Will the use-cases be sufficiently monetisable?

And then the elephant-in-the-room question. To what extent will AI be labour-substituting versus labour-augmenting? If it's the former, will the distribution of income become even more skewed in favour of capital at the expense of labour? What will this imply for future employment, consumption and demand?
