Category: Editorial
Title: AI mania masks economic fissures and rising Part Two

AI mania masks economic fissures and rising uncertainty

Are we setting ourselves up for the classic fallacy of composition that Keynes warned of? Is the recent wave of AI-related layoffs just the canary in the coalmine? Ominous uncertainties abound. The case of Taiwan is instructive. Taiwan has been at the epicentre of the AI boom, exporting servers, GPUs and high-end chips that populate US data centres.

Taiwan's exports to the US are growing at a sizzling 50 per cent pace, pushing GDP growth up to 7 per cent. Yet, because the AI buildout is so capital intensive, there has been no positive spillover to jobs and consumption. Even as AI exports have boomed, consumption growth is averaging less than 1 per cent and consumer confidence is falling!

So much so that Taiwan's government had to roll out a 2 per cent of GDP fiscal package in September in spite of the AI mania. A sign of things to come globally? If these contradictions were to slowly pervade the global economy, where will the fiscal space come from? Unsustainable fiscal deficits in advanced economies are proving to be a key source of global instability.

G7 public debt is already at 125 per cent of GDP and expected to rise to 140 per cent by 2030. The US fiscal deficit is running at almost 8 per cent of GDP for an economy above its pre-pandemic path! Exorbitant procyclicality, anyone? Japan's public debt is 230 per cent of GDP but that is unlikely to stop the new PM from announcing another fiscal package.

Bond markets are growing increasingly nervous, but the politics everywhere seems incapable of orchestrating much-need fiscal adjustment. The gamble with fiscal fire is well and truly on. Finally, the US Supreme Court has just begun to hear whether President Donald Trump's invoking of the IEEPA (International Emergency Economic Powers Act) to impose tariffs  -  both reciprocal and fentanyl  -  is legal.

If it is deemed illegal, the US treasury will have to refund Rs $100 billion of tariff revenues, putting more pressure on the US fiscal. The administration is likely to respond by invoking other statues of the law (sections 122, 232, 301) to impose country-specific and sectoral tariffs. But all this will simply compound confusion and uncertainty.

And what happens to the legality of trade agreements based on IEEPA tariffs? Five years after the pandemic and a year into Trump's presidency, underlying macro fissures have only widened and uncertainties have only grown. US tariffs are the highest since the 1930s and an inexorable descent towards deglobalisation is on.

Emerging markets are still grappling with pandemic-induced scarring and now confront a China Shock 2.0  -  an avalanche of cheap Chinese imports. The promise of AI (on productivity) is matched only by its peril (on unemployment) at a time when countries lack the fiscal space to backstop labour markets. The global community that descends on Washington remains divided and uncertain on both the prognosis and the policy response.

But equity markets will have none of this. The AI frenzy is propelling markets to ever-new highs. The pressures and problems of the present are being ignored for the (yet untested) promise of the future. Markets may be priced to perfection. But reality rarely follows suit. By Sajjid Z. Chinoy The writer is head of Asia Economics at J P Morgan
