Category: Editorial
Title: Air Indias hard luck Part One

Air India's hard luck

Today's Finshots, we explain why Air India's turnaround has taken longer than expected despite having the Tata name behind it. The Story 27th January, 2022. That was the day the Tata Group reclaimed Air India from the Indian government, buying back the airline for ₹18,000 crore. Air India as you know, was JRD Tata's baby.

It was once admired by airlines across the world for its high standards and exceptional service. But in 1953, the government nationalised it under the Air Corporations Act, taking over nine private airlines, much to Tata's dismay and despite his strong opposition. His fears, unfortunately, came true.

JRD Tata had warned that the government had no experience running an airline and that nationalisation would bring bureaucracy, low employee morale and poorer passenger service. And over the next seven decades, that's exactly what happened. The government eventually handed back a broken Air India to the Tatas.

And of the ₹18,000 crore they paid, only about 15% went to the government, while the rest was used to take over the airline's debt But the Tatas believed they could revive it. They launched a five-year transformation plan called Vihaan. AI, inspired by the Sanskrit word meaning "the dawn of a new era".

The plan promised to expand Air India's fleet and network, improve punctuality and customer satisfaction, drive innovation, return the airline to profitability, and capture at least 30% of India's domestic aviation market. And Air India wasted little time putting that blueprint into action. It started with a complete brand makeover, unveiling a new logo while retaining the iconic Maharaja mascot.

It then placed a record order for 470 aircraft from Boeing and Airbus, leased and bought more widebody planes to strengthen its long-haul network, and began refurbishing older aircraft with brand-new seats and cabins. The airline also set about simplifying its business. It brought together Air India, Vistara, Air India Express, and AirAsia India under one umbrella before merging them into two brands  -  one full-service and one low-cost.

It believed that this would create a much stronger airline group with a significant presence across both domestic and international markets. At the same time, Air India more than doubled its workforce from around 11,000 employees to over 24,000, while also doubling its pilot and cabin crew strength. Behind the scenes, it overhauled its technology, upgraded its finance and crew management systems, added a new global booking platform, improved revenue management, strengthened training facilities and launched new ancillary products.

And all these efforts slowly began paying off, helping Air India grow its domestic market share to 24% or in other words three times what it was when the Tata Group took it over. But despite all that, with just six months left before the fifth anniversary of the Tata takeover, Tata Sons Chairman N. Chandrasekaran admitted a few days ago that turning Air India around could take as long as a decade, instead of the five years that Vihaan.

AI had originally envisioned. And honestly, he probably didn't even have to say it because the numbers tell the story. Air India's revenue has climbed from ₹19,800 crore at the time of the takeover to ₹70,000 crore in FY26. But that's still lower than last year's ₹76,700 crore. More worryingly, its losses have ballooned to ₹22,200 crore, which is more than double last year's losses and far higher than when the Tatas first took over.
