Category: Editorial
Title: Algorithmocracy Of the Algorithm By the Part One

Algorithmocracy: Of the Algorithm, By the Algorithm, For the Algorithm

By the Algorithm, For the Algorithm When most people talk about misinformation, they focus on the issue of the distribution of falsehoods or the absence of common facts. However, things have changed. For years we have heard that social media creates echo chambers because people within different social media networks consume divergent information.

The most common theory as to why people are becoming more politically divided is that people are ignorant to the other side's views because of the way algorithms section different people into different digital networks. Although this theory is the most widely accepted, it doesn't adequately describe how social media platforms create public opinion today. The true form of postmodern divide is not that citizens do not see the same things.

Instead, the same things are seen through wholly different algorithmic structures. I have recently been reminded of this when discussing a political protest with a friend that gained significant coverage. We both did see the protest because we both watched the same marches, speeches, and many of the same protest related videos.

Our conversation quickly turned to disbelief. Protest coverage on my feed was framing the movement as disruptive to civil order. The same coverage on my friend's feed was framing the movement as protecting civil order. Again, we are not talking about different protests. We are discussing divergent viewpoints of the same protest.

This distinction is important. When most people talk about misinformation, they focus on the issue of the distribution of falsehoods or the absence of common facts. However, things have changed. The main issue is elsewhere. While most people focus on the event that attracted the most attention and the most outrage, Algorithms focus on the emotional and moral aspects of the event.

The same Protest or Election or Court verdict or Policy Announcement can be different for different users and can be viewed through the lenses of entirely different meanings. I am calling this new phenomenon Algorithmocracy. These algorithms do much more than recommend or suggest information. Algorithms actually govern public opinion, They do not tell us what to think.

In fact, they do the opposite. They tell us how to think, by surrounding us with certain information, emphasizing certain facts, elevating certain reactions, and interpreting certain viewpoints. The real power of these systems is not how they control the information, but how they control how we think.

This model's opposite of the typical "filter bubble" is built on collision rather than isolation. What social media platforms have learned is that there is nothing more engaging and thus more important to sustain user interest than national disputes and controversies. So, they make sure that every user is exposed to the controversies.

Social media also knows that users more readily engage with content that aligns with their emotional state. Years of behavioral data of everything we have done and every subtle shift we have made such as pauses, comments, shares, likes and outages, give recommendation systems the ability to predict the best framing to engage us. This results in one user being presented content about law and order while another user is confronted with content about civil liberties.

They both are covering the same subject but see a moral context that is specific to them. The result of this is not just simple disagreement. Traditionally, when people are confronted with differing viewpoints, the response is usually along the lines of, "Oh, I didn't know that." But when two people talk about the same event but end up with opposing conclusions, the response is not fact vs.
