Category: Editorial
Title: Algorithmocracy Of the Algorithm By the Part Two

Algorithmocracy: Of the Algorithm, By the Algorithm, For the Algorithm

Fact but moral vs. moral. It is assumed that the other person has witnessed what has been witnessed. From this, the response is to question the other person's judgment, morality, intelligence, etc. This happens not because the facts are diverging but because facts are presented emotionally. This architecture is largely commercial, but not ideological.

Social media companies prioritize engagement, whereas presentations that are calm, balanced and nuanced do not encourage scrolling. Public outrage, certainty and moral urgency do. Therefore, algorithms will segment its user base and continuously show users interpretations of events that elicit the greatest emotional response.

The goal, however, is not comprehension of events but the preservation of engagement (a.k.a. attention). This is a relatively straightforward process. A large, nationally prominent event captures users' attention. Within many users' feeds, recommendations for the most popular interpretations will be prominently displayed.

Users who do not agree will typically engage by posting comments, sharing the alternative views and/or verbally attacking the participants of the recommendations. The ultimate goal of the system is to sustain and encourage engagement. This situation is extremely troubling for Liberal Democracy. Vigorous disagreement is the cornerstone of Liberal Democracy.

In such a system, it is expected that citizens will disagree on value and policy issues, but will still have broad concordance on the events that are of public importance. Algorithmocracy shows that such a society can have shared events, videos and even prominent moments of public concern and still not share a concordance of public importance. The consequences reach further than just politics.

A minimum amount of shared reality is necessary for public trust, social unity, and the existence of legitimate institutions. Citizens begin to lose trust in each other and the existence of objective public debate as algorithms create a preference for maximizing emotionally engaged interpretations in place of socially constructive interpretations. Each argument is simply another representation of the separate camps where supporting evidence is perceived to exist exclusively for each camp's assertions.

Political theories have addressed the power and scope of politics and the issues of representation for centuries; the focus has historically been on who governs? In the context of the new digital reality, an equally valid question is who governs the representations of public life for the citizens? The power increasingly lies not with public representatives and institutions, editorial gatekeeping, or public service broadcasters, but with commercial enterprises focused on optimizing profit over democracy, thinly disguised as social welfare.

Consequently, the greater challenge of the century is not the need for additional information or the addressing of misinformation. The architecture of attention and interpretation is equally fundamental for democracy. If we persist in viewing systems that determine information flows and audience engagement for maximum commercial profit as benign, neutral systems, the fault of citizen disengagement and of systems that strengthen and exacerbate polarization will continue to be misplaced on citizens.

The principal quandary of democratic systems now is not the fight for control of the information systems that dictate the narrative. Rather it is the fight for control over the systems that determine information engagement and audience interpretation. Dr Abhishek Ranjan (The author holds a PhD in International Relations from JNU)
