Category: Editorial
Title: An agenda for risk mitigation Part One

An agenda for risk mitigation

India should reduce vulnerability to FPI, by reducing CAD and securing stable means of financing it There is a belief that India has missed the AI bus, with investors preferring to go to countries in the race. But quite a few Indian AI applications have been highlighted recently. In past tech-led booms the major gains have come from applications.

Small language models (SLMs) distilled from large ones and trained on more relevant data are cheaper to run. Productivity gains of 30 per cent are feasible and will raise incomes and demand. Software companies will play a large part in adapting and applying such SLMs and in other customisations. Household participation in equity markets has risen and the current volatility is thought to be endangering both household participation and their savings.

But the equity and mutual fund share of household financial savings is still only 15 per cent, and physical assets dominate household net worth giving them a good mix of assets. Equity is not bought from leveraged funds, so there is no pressure to sell when markets are down. Having been through several cycles, households know better than to do so.

Their mutual fund SIPs are sustaining. Households, and those who invest for them, believe in the India growth story and understand how to buy in dips. The large derivative trade is predominantly through regulated institutions who understand the risks. In a $3.92-billion economy even a small percentage of GDP coming into stock markets is large in absolute amounts.

In 2025 domestic equity ownership has overtaken that of FPI, which, at about 15 per cent, is at a 20-year low. Comparatively, in the US 18 per cent of domestic equity is held by foreigners. In China it is 3-5 per cent. India will do well to keep this number low. More domestic participation will reduce dependence on FPI and increase returns on household savings.

It has already reduced volatility of stock market indices, which kept rising through the Ukraine conflict and have only shed some gains now after more than a year of external shocks and FPI exit. Indian private investment, domestic savings and consumption demand are all criticised as inadequate. But investment ratios of above 30 per cent are the 5th highest in the world and only behind China's 40 per cent among large economies.

This is mostly private since public investment to GDP ratio is only 4 per cent. The unorganised sector is enumerated as part of the household sector in India. This sector is borrowing and investing. Household net financial savings to GDP ratio fell, therefore, but the savings in physical assets ratio rose.

Gross domestic savings remain above 30 per cent since corporate savings are rising. In the past, savings ratios have risen with growth. The current account deficit, a measure of foreign savings used, remains low at about 1 per cent. The demand response to the GST tax cut last year has shown corporates that there is demand in India at appropriate prices and the government has tools as well as intention to moderate external shocks.

Corporate investment has also picked up as manufacturing is set to benefit from free trade agreements (FTAs), green substitutions, demand for defence exports and construction. Agriculture and service exports add to Indian diversity. Even so, India's consumption/GDP percentage of about 60 makes it less dependent on exports as a source of demand, compared to China where it is about 40.
