Category: Editorial
Title: An artful Irish vision Basic income for Part Two

An artful Irish vision. Basic income for artists

The basic income amount, indeed, is only about 30% of the average gross annual salary in Ireland. However, the significantly lower levels of anxiety or despair and the 20% lower chance of experiencing forced hardship were two key benefits of the programme. It's pertinent to note that female beneficiaries experienced the most improvement in their psychological and overall well-being.

As per the cost-benefit analysis, artists experienced an average monthly increase of almost €500 in arts-related income and an increase of €333 in arts-related expenses. At the same time, their dependence on social assistance reduced, and their income from non-arts employment decreased by almost €280. This shows that the programme has resulted in the improvement and transformation of the lives of artists, as they are now able to complete their work, remain in the sector, and interact with their audience.

However, it should not be forgotten that the BIA is not a universal basic income. The aim of this targeted policy intervention is to support working artists and creative arts professionals to focus on their artistic pursuits. Moreover, in a recent public consultation, 97% of the public and the arts sector have agreed that the scheme should be made permanent.

And, as reported, inspired by the Irish example, the Scottish government is actively considering a similar basic income scheme for artists. The link between artistic and labour values in the Irish study was explored in a paper published in the journal Cultural Trends in July 2025. In addition to providing significant support to a broad demographic range of artists and arts workers, it offers a unique example worldwide of how a national cultural policy instrument can inform the emerging story and offer insights into how some aspects of a basic income policy might operate if introduced for the general population.

"If we value art, we must support basic income," Canadian tech journalist and author Paris Marx also said in an essay on Medium 10 years ago. And "take a bunch of working-class kids, give them enough money for them to hang around and play together, and you get the Beatles", was David Graeber's direct answer. The ball is rolling now.

Who knows, maybe the world will become more artful. By ATANU BISWAS Professor of Statistics, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
