Category: Editorial
Title: An agenda for risk mitigation Part Two

An agenda for risk mitigation

Global shocks It is strange that there is no onus on the international financial architecture to reduce the volatility emerging markets (EMs) face from global events. Maintaining stability of the international financial system is the mandate of international institutions. But they have shrugged off responsibility and do their best to convince EMs that volatility is due to something 'structurally' wrong with them.

Believers in free markets continue to advise EMs to reduce reserve accumulation and intervention: Currencies should float even if they tend to overshoot. Markets themselves like reserve accumulation, but not the reverse. Practical central bankers, however, know multiple instruments, including buffers, have to be used to manage external shocks and persistent misalignment.

Diverse actions reduce risk! Reserves fell only in six out of 30 years when outflows reduced the capital account surplus to below the CAD. The last 2 Trump-regime volatility years are included in the six. Why shouldn't reserves accumulated in so many surplus years be used to moderate depreciation in the few years of outflows?

Strategically, intervention is avoided at the onset of outflows so they take a loss. In 2025, however, the rupee was allowed to over-depreciate in the hope that it would help solve balance of payments pressures. The rupee depreciated with the dollar although other currencies were appreciating, yet this did not improve either CAD or inflows.

The 40 country real exchange rate (REER) depreciated 10 per cent over its long-run equilibrium level to which it has always returned after past outflow episodes. In theory real depreciation should encourage exports and discourage imports. But Indian exports largely go to competitive markets where currency gains have to be shared, while there is immediate full price increase in commodity imports.

A falling nominal exchange rate discourages foreign inflows, since they expect the fall to continue. They prefer coming in only when they are confident a reversal has set in. Benefits from rupee reversal outweigh those from higher interest rates or lower hedging costs. After the Middle-East conflict long dollar positions increased in the belief the rupee would continue to depreciate, although it was already over-depreciated.

Measures are required to arrest what can become a self-fulfilling cycle. More nominal depreciation is unlikely to deliver real depreciation since it would only further raise the price of oil imports and inflation, which causes the real appreciation. It is better if the 100 REER value is reached through nominal appreciation than through inflation.

India does need to reduce its trade deficit but a competitive real exchange rate can only be one component of its strategy. Others include trade diversification in products, sources and destinations, more FTAs, a big push for green energy and reduction in logistics costs. The Middle-East conflict will give a boost to all of these.

Already net oil imports/GDP has trended down from 8.5 per cent to 5.5 per cent. Oil exporters should worry. India also needs to reduce its vulnerability to FPI volatility by reducing the CAD and increasing the more stable means of financing it. The stock of FDI to GDP in the US was about 20 per cent in 2024, in China it averaged 21.6 since 2005; in 2024 had fallen to 19.3.

India's 14 per cent value can be increased towards 20 per cent by allowing more Chinese FDI. Analysts and rating agencies who focus only on broad averages and past vulnerabilities miss the many sources of change and resilience. Post-pandemic outcomes, therefore, have tended to outperform expectations.

By Ashima Goyal The writer Professor Emeritus, IGIDR
