Category: Editorial
Title: An alternative proposal on Viksit Bharat Part Two

An alternative proposal on Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhisthan Bill

It now provides for graded financial penalties for regulatory violations. No institution should be closed without getting the consent of the government of the State where it is located. Under the Bill, the accreditation council will outsource the task of accreditation to a network of third-party accrediting institutions to circumvent the deliberative process and sideline the desirable outcomes that the society expects the HEIs to contribute to.

The Accreditation Council (Unnayan Parishad) provides for technology-driven quality assessment. The approach to regulation should be deliberative and process-oriented; it cannot be prescriptive. Output-based evaluation (patents and publications), focussed on assessment of institutions based on educational outputs (learning levels and employability), may not have much to do with the desirable outcomes.

Evaluation should be outcome-and impact-centric. The Standards Council (Manak Parishad), sitting in Delhi, cannot be expected to define standards and attributes for all types of higher education. The standards will have to be shaped industrial sector-and State-wise. Constitutionally speaking, education is a subject under the Concurrent List.

The VBSA Bill's provisions are applicable to all State governments. The State governments should have a role in the determination of standards, accreditation, and regulations. The determination of standards, accreditation, and regulations cannot be a top-down affair. Currently, States fund their higher education systems.

The Bill does not offer social and inter-regional equity. Under it, private sector higher education institutions do not provide for equity and social justice. The State governments can and should be expected to take care of priorities such as contribution to school education, environment, climate, local resources rejuvenation, and local economic development.

The amended Bill must give 50% weightage each to SHECs and the Union government's councils in the process of regulation, accreditation, and determination of standards, so as to focus on the goals of space for inter-regional equity, linguistic and cultural autonomy, social justice, innovation, fundamental science, new technologies, and global excellence. The Bill should also consider incorporating a provision for regional councils to accommodate emerging ecological and socio-technical aspects in their deliberations. The amended Bill should provide for an alternative framework for governance of higher education as a shared responsibility to build enabling mechanisms into the structures to be developed for transformative governance.

The Bill must have a separate Higher Education Grants Council (HEGC) to disburse the funds available to the Ministry of Education for the integration of teaching, research, and outreach. The HEGC will have to provide not only regular funding to Central institutions but also generous funding to laggards run by the States to bridge the historical discrimination, structural gaps and voids, and deficits arising out of lack of support for research and outreach. SHECs' role and contribution should be legislated to realise the vision and strategy of joint implementation of standards, accreditation, and regulation through the proposed verticals in the form of three separate councils.

The councils for regulation, accreditation, and standards determination should be maintained by academicians and professionals and have their own separate budgets. The SHECs should be duly funded by the HEGC to enable the process to become a shared responsibility. All the cesses that are presently provided for the implementation of the shared responsibility should be at the disposal of the HEGC.

Who should regulate what should be explicitly stated in the amended Bill. The public purposes of higher education should be specifically mentioned to disburse allocations for the outcomes proposed for consideration. By Dinesh Abrol Faculty, Transdisciplinary Research Cluster on Sustainability Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
