Category: Editorial
Title: An energy transition driven by ethics Part Two

An energy transition driven by ethics

And to that extent, perhaps Mr. Stiell et al. are smart to seize the chance. Without a war driving prices up, the high upfront capital expenditure for renewables is less attractive to governments. If oil is cheap, the payback period for a large offshore wind farm might be 15 years; if gas prices jump 50%, this period could shrink to 4-5 years.

In other words, sans a war, governments would have continued to place fiscal responsibility before energy sovereignty. In the same scenario, the world's dependencies on the critical mineral supply chain presents itself as a scarier prospect. If West Asia is stable and oil is flowing, the U.S. and its allies would likely view the option of trading West Asian oil for Chinese minerals as a net loss in strategic autonomy, which could encourage countries to reshore mineral mining and processing capabilities even before the energy transition picks up pace.

For India, a more stable supply of oil together with its arguably excessive focus on easing business could render its off-ramp into a long and gentle slope with room to continue using its domestic coal and cheap imported gas to power industrial growth while waiting for renewables to mature. In other words, the Strait of Hormuz blockade could be forcing India to accelerate investments in renewables simply because it has no choice. Ethics, not fear Mr.

Stiell is in effect wielding fear as his primary tool, especially when he says "dependency is ripping away national security". The effects of fear never last  - especially when countries imagine new ways to outmanoeuvre these threats  - and neither do those of guilt. What ultimately matters is ethics.

The virtue of renewables should be debated, and adopted, in order to save the planet for the 22nd century rather than for saving the economy for another month. This also matters because when oil is cheap, the environmental damage of mining lithium, or human rights issues in Congolese cobalt mines are scrutinised more heavily by the public  -  and while this is as it should be, it should not just be because oil is cheap. By Vasudevan Mukunth
