Category: Editorial
Title: An Israel visit its strategic economic Part One

An Israel visit  -  its strategic, economic, regional impact

The Prime Minister's visit will help deepen engagement with Tel Aviv, going far beyond routine diplomacy The West Asian region is staring at the possibility of its worst ever military conflict with one of the largest American military buildups in the Persian Gulf. Iran is defiant and has refused to bow down to 'unreasonable demands' from the United States. Concurrently, in Gaza, although the ceasefire has held since October 2025, the prospects of lasting peace still look remote.

In addition, emerging fault lines in the region are drawing allies such as the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Saudi Arabia into opposing military blocs. In the midst of such an uncertain security situation, Prime Minister Narendra Modi is set to undertake a two-day visit to Israel (February 25-26, 2026). This will be Mr.

Modi's second visit to Israel, following his historic first visit in July 2017  -  the first by any Indian Prime Minister. Notably, this is a standalone visit with no engagement with Palestinian Authority leadership, highlighting India's success in "de-hyphenating" its Israel engagement. The question, however, that arises is why this visit?

What role can India play in this fragile security situation in the region? With India and Israel facing similar security threats, how can they take this very important partnership forward? Convergence in a security partnership Surrounded by hostile neighbours and as victims of frequent terror attacks, both countries have often sought convergence on security and defence issues.

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), India has been Israel's largest defence customer for several years, accounting for about 34% of Israel's total arms exports between 2020 and 2024. The cooperation has gradually progressed from imports to joint development and technology collaboration. Over the past few decades, Israel has provided India with a number of cutting-edge technologies, weapon and surveillance platforms such as unmanned aerial vehicles, missiles, special forces equipment and radar systems.

The Barak-8 air and missile defence system, co-developed by India and Israel, is one such success story. During Israel Defence Minister Benjamin Gantz's visit to New Delhi in June 2022, there was the 'India-Israel Vision on Defence Cooperation' for enhancing cooperation in the field of futuristic defence technologies. In November 2025, India and Israel signed an agreement to deepen cooperation in defence, industry and technology, including the sharing of advanced systems to support joint development and production.

For India, there were lessons from its experience in Operation Sindoor (May 2025)  -  the need for a strong and impregnable air (including anti-drone) and missile defence shield under Mission 'Sudarshan Chakra'. There are inputs that there could be special focus on it during Mr. Modi's visit including the procurement and co-production of the 'Iron Beam'  -  a 100kW-class high-energy laser system capable of intercepting drones, rockets, and mortars efficiently and cost-effectively.

There are also reports that Autonomous Guard, an Israeli company has signed a deal with an Indian private defence firm valued at approximately $$1.9 million, which would cover the supply of advanced surveillance and threat-detection systems, specialising in sensor-based observation technologies. The science, technology and innovation link India has benefited immensely from Israel's success in modern technology and innovations, especially in agriculture, water and electronics. There are more than 35 Centres of Excellence (CoE) in India which are focused in high quality and high-density production of flowers, vegetables, fruits (mango, citrus, litchi, date palm, pomegranate), and beekeeping.
