Category: Editorial
Title: An Israel visit its strategic economic Part Two

An Israel visit  -  its strategic, economic, regional impact

Water management technologies too are critical, especially with many water-scarce areas in India. MASHAV, Israel's Agency for International Development Cooperation under Israel's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, signed agreements with Haryana in June 2022 and Rajasthan in December 2024 to collaborate on integrated water resource management and capacity building. With Artificial Intelligence (AI) rapidly emerging as a key driver of modern technology, it is expected to become a focus area in future bilateral cooperation and innovation initiatives.

Israel-India bilateral trade is often overshadowed by security cooperation. It, however, remains a significant pillar of engagement. India is Israel's second-largest trading partner in Asia, with bilateral trade reaching $3.75 billion in FY2024-2025. While merchandise trade continues to be dominated by diamonds, petroleum and chemicals, the partnership is expanding into electronics, high-tech products, communications and medical equipment.

In September 2025, during the visit of Israeli Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich, India and Israel signed a Bilateral Investment Agreement. This was followed by the signing of the Terms of Reference for a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) during Commerce and Industry Minister Piyush Goyal's visit to Israel in November 2025. With India having recently concluded several significant trade deals, the FTA with Israel could gain the necessary momentum during Mr.

Modi's visit. Israel is also keen to establish arrangements and exemptions for Indian infrastructure companies to participate in building critical roads and ports. Additionally, similar to India's agreement with Russia, Israel may pursue a deal to facilitate "human mobility" to attract skilled Indian talent.

Another key aspect to watch during the Modi visit is the progress of the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor (IMEC). Announced at the G-20 Summit in Delhi in September 2023, this intercontinental connectivity project holds strategic significance for both countries. Although the Gaza conflict had temporarily stalled the initiative, there is now a renewed sense of urgency to advance it.

Recent trade agreements with the European Union, Oman, and the UAE are expected to boost trade in both value and volume, creating the need for a shorter and safer transport route. With the Suez Canal route vulnerable to disruptions from regional conflicts, IMEC could provide an alternative, secure corridor to Europe. But achieving lasting peace in Gaza remains crucial for the project's success.

Gaza peace process and regional dynamics Discussion on the Gaza peace process is a definite likelihood. During the recent 'Summit' of the Board of Peace, presided over by U.S. President Donald Trump on February 19, 2026,. more than 50 countries participated, with some pledging $7 billion in funding and others committing troops to the International Stabilisation Force.

India attended as an observer and has not yet defined its role in the process. Given India's strong ties with both the Gulf region and Israel, discussions may include potential avenues for India's involvement in Gaza. Both leaders are also expected to discuss regional dynamics in depth, including developments in Iran, given the potential implications of conflict for India and the wider region, particularly with regard to India's energy security.

India's hosting of the 2nd India-Arab Foreign Ministers' Meeting (IAFMM), in January 2026, along with Mr. Modi's visits to Jordan and Oman (December 2025), and the visit of the UAE President in January 2026, demonstrate the careful balance that India has forged in the region. This sets the stage for a constructive and realistic discussion on various regional issues during the visit.
