Category: Editorial
Title: AQI can be cut without hurting growth Part One

AQI can be cut without hurting growth

Policy push to energise the EV ecosystem and creating new, smaller, well-planned cities should help reduce pollution levels The severity of the problem of very high air quality index (AQI) varies across the country. Parts of the country like the South are better placed or better managed but only in a relative sense. High AQI is a serious problem in India.

And, yet, the authorities are not active enough in meaningfully dealing with the issue. Why is this so? Policymakers are aspiring for high GDP growth, and there is fear that dealing with high AQI and environmental issues can come in the way of boosting growth. Hence, there is near-inaction on the AQI front; there are, however, other reasons also for this.

The fear though, is exaggerated. It is a matter of finding the right solution, which, broadly speaking, involves two aspects. One, dealing with high AQI, especially in the big cities. The other is about meaningfully moving away from the model of continuously expanding big cities. Coming to addressing high AQI, let's focus on the automobile industry as an example; there are other industries and factors that contribute to the problem as well.

In China, the one-time prices of electric vehicles (EVs) are now a little less than those of petrol vehicles, and close to half of the new vehicles produced are EVs. There is a lesson here for India. There should be a big shift to EVs (their indirect contribution to pollution is effectively low). However, the prices of EVs are high in India, and the charging stations are inadequate.

All this limits the size of the EV industry, the related economies of scale, and the possible reduction in the prices. But policy measures can help. Policymakers should meaningfully subsidise EVs, and expand and enable the needed infrastructure. Also, they can simultaneously raise the taxes on petrol/diesel vehicles significantly.

This is revenue neutral. It is also about restructuring  -  not diminishing  -  the automobile industry in GDP. This should pave the way for lower AQI. It is true that some of the capacity to manufacture petrol cars can go "waste" with the shift to EVs. While some physical capital can become useless, there can be greater gain in human capital through the reduction in millions of cases of stunted growth of children, who are at present affected by high AQI in their very early years.

Their contribution to GDP at a later stage will be limited if the AQI issue isn't addressed. Delhi alone, for instance, adds about 500 passenger cars every day. Expand smaller cities This brings us to the other part of the long-term solution. We have some very large cities, and some with extended regions, like the National Capital Region (NCR).

The AQI is high in such places. It is, in several ways, an outcome of the very size of the regions, the large population there, the long commutes, the demolition of small/old buildings, the construction of taller buildings, and the regular expansion and upgrading of general infrastructure. There is a legacy, with its implications for AQI and even GDP growth.

High AQI needs to be dealt with in a way that takes care of other important problems as well. There's need for some new urban areas. These can be altogether new cities, or extensions of small cities that are far away from the big ones. It is true that building new urban areas is costly. But this is mainly from the point of cost of construction.
