Category: Editorial
Title: Are Indias forex reserves really adequate to Part One

Are India's forex reserves really 'adequate to provide cushion against external shocks'?

Really 'adequate to provide cushion against external shocks'? The RBI uses its forex reserves to defend the rupee. But the level of reserves itself can add to investor confidence  -  or cause concerns Earlier this week, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) said India's foreign exchange reserves "remain adequate to provide cushion against external shocks".

The central bank's assurances are crucial: so far in March, a net $12.1 billion worth of Indian shares have been sold by foreign investors  -  the highest monthly figure ever. This has dragged down the rupee to a new record low almost every other day. At their current levels  -  $710 billion as on March 13  -  the forex reserves are not far from the record of $728 billion that was hit at the end of February.

However, this figure requires a lot of unpacking. Components of FX reserves India's forex reserves have four components: foreign currency (FX) assets, gold, Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), and the Reserve Tranche Position with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). SDRs are a buffer of sorts for IMF members, who can exchange it for currency when they are in trouble.

The value of SDRs is based on a basket of five currencies  -  the US dollar, the euro, the Chinese renminbi, the Japanese yen, and the pound sterling. As of March 13, India's SDR holdings were worth $18.7 billion. The reserve tranche position with the IMF is akin to an emergency line of credit. India's reserve position is worth $4.8 billion.

As such, the real heft in India's forex reserves only comes from holdings of FX assets ($556 billion) and gold ($131 billion). However, selling gold for the RBI is a last resort  -  like it was the case during the Balance of Payments (BoP) crisis of 1991; the central bank can't sell its gold on a day-to-day basis to defend the rupee. As such, FX assets are the realistic measure of the RBI's ability to defend the rupee on a continued basis.

However, even that figure requires adjustments. Dual rupee defence The RBI can stop the rupee from falling in two ways. The first involves the central bank selling FX in the 'spot' market. This reduces the forex reserves immediately and helps the currency strengthen or not weaken further. But defending the rupee this way has an inadvertent impact on the domestic financial system: when the RBI sells FX, it gets rupees in return.

This reduces rupee availability  -  or liquidity  -  in the Indian financial system and drives up interest rates. Which is why the central bank also sells FX in the 'forward' market: it gets the desired result  -  the rupee is defended  -  but not the undesirable indirect impact on interest rates. How?

Because the RBI doesn't have to immediately deliver the FX, but at a future date, rupee liquidity is not tightened. As per latest data for the end of January, the RBI had net sold $68 billion of FX in forwards. This figure has likely increased in the last two months considering the rupee has been under severe pressure in March.

However, the RBI's FX assets must be adjusted for these forward sales. Even if one conservatively assumes the figure to have remained at $68 billion, the FX assets number reduces to under $500 billion. "The RBI may need to keep an eye on net FX adequacy," HSBC said this week, adding that the number of months of goods imports that reserves can cover is approaching 2013 levels  -  "when India was last under BoP stress".
