Category: Editorial
Title: Are freebies really a curse Part One

Are freebies really a curse?

Direct cash handouts confer several benefits ranging from spurring demand for goods, and empowering women The recent State Assembly elections have once again seen announcements of cash transfers, which has attracted the attention of economists. Such giveaways, or freebies, are considered a drain on the State exchequer.

But, is there another side to this issue which we are missing? Unlike the Centre, States are bound by fiscal deficit norms, usually 3-3.5 per cent of GDP. If this is higher at the time of announcement of their respective Budgets, States would have to seek the Centre or the RBI's permission, anyway. Therefore, it is hard to say that overall fiscal ratios are breached by such expenditures.

Second, cash transfers in the form of direct payments or subsidies are implemented by both the Centre and States. In fact, the Centre has a larger budget and deficit ratio relative to States and hence can provide greater support through centrally sponsored schemes which involve food subsidy, cash payments to farmers, employment programmes, among others. Capex trade-off Third, critics bring up the trade-off between capex and revenue expenditure.

Freebies are considered non-productive while capex generates future output by forging strong backward linkages with industries involved in supplying inputs. Arguably, cash transfers are not really unproductive as the cash given is usually spent, since it is usually dispensed to the lower income groups. This adds to the consumption chain and drives the demand for goods and services.

A significant part of rural demand, which has supported growth in the consumer goods industry, can be attributed to such transfers. States also often give sewing machines, cycles, laptops to womenfolk, which spur demand in the industries concerned  -  just as construction of a road adds to demand for steel and cement. Empowering women Fourth, cash transfers are supposed to create a moral hazard, affecting the incentive to work.

This argument may be weak because it has been seen that cash handouts to women help them to run their households. Further, free transport for girls and women empower them as it helps them attend school and commute to their place of work. Free transport prevents school dropouts especially in rural households.

In rural areas, especially in the lower income groups, households do not want to invest in education for girls. Free transport enables such empowerment. Fifth, the Centre runs a free food scheme which costs ₹2 lakh crore. This game-changing scheme has provided access to food and freed up money that can be spent on other goods and services.

The free food scheme has helped people rise above the poverty line. It has also spurred a shift in consumption pattern from food to non-food items, which is revealed in in the household consumption expenditure survey (also used for recalibrating the CPI index). Sixth, the Centre has been running the rural employment scheme for over two decades with outlays of ₹80,000 crore to ₹1 lakh crore on an annual basis.

The idea of the MGNREGA programme was to provide some employment to the farmers during the off-season. The high funds utilisation of the scheme is a pointer to the lack of job opportunities in rural areas. The demand also perhaps shows that the trickle down approach, which is theoretically supposed to unfold as the economy grows, has not worked in the desired manner in the farm sector.
