Category: Editorial
Title: Are freebies really a curse Part Two

Are freebies really a curse?

Seventh, direct cash transfers to targeted people are more beneficial than capital expenditure which benefits only the skilled force through the backward linkages. For example an outlay on a road increases demand for steel and cement which will increase demand for labour and result in higher employment in these sectors. However, besides taking time to play out, the benefit of such spending goes mainly to those who have the skill sets to join this sector.

Cash transfers are agnostic to the qualification of the recipient and only considers their income level. Therefore, there are convincing arguments in support of government cash transfers. They directly help the targeted beneficiaries. They do not depend on other conditions working out as in the case of capex.

In fact if capex involves use of imported material, the benefit for domestic employment may be limited. The multiplier effects of capital expenditure may not always materialise. But cash transfers do benefit industries that see more demand from greater spending, leading to second-order investment opportunities.

Universal basic income There is also a growing consensus over the need for a universal basic income, especially in developing countries. Cash transfers are definitely a step in providing a basic income especially for low-income households. They are also a way of bringing about redistributive justice in a country with considerable inequality of income.

As long as these transfers are well targeted, they cannot really be regarded as objectionable. With the proliferation of digitization in the country, identification of the beneficiaries has become easier. But the more crucial question is: for how long can the government provide such transfers? Until such time that the growth impulses are able to create more universal employment, such support will be required.

But it is also true that such transfers can provide perverse incentives for not seeking work or education. In the West, governments gave generous doles during Covid to people who had lost jobs. Now, it has become difficult to withdraw them and beneficiaries have stopped looking for work. This is a risk for sure, though in the near future it is not an issue for India, given the challenges in job creation at the lower level.

By Madan Sabnavis The writer is Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda. Views expressed are personal
