Category: Editorial
Title: As gap widens between credit and deposit Part One

As gap widens between credit and deposit growth, banks turn to a costly solution

And deposit growth, banks turn to a costly solution Current account and savings account (CASA) deposits have long been a reliable funding source for banks. But as these deposits slow, banks are looking to other sources of funds such as term deposits and CDs that come with their own issues. Credit growth has picked up over the past few months, but banks have struggled to grow their deposit base to match it.

Growth in current account and savings account (CASA) deposits has particularly slowed, with retail investors now having a range of avenues to put their savings in, such as stocks, mutual funds, and other types of fixed deposits. These avenues provide much better returns than traditional CASA accounts and have become more accessible over time due to digitisation and regulatory bodies' simplification of norms. CASA deposits are low-cost for banks and are used to fund loans, the major source of revenue.

They are considered a reliable and "sticky" source of funds for banks due to low churn, as such depositors aren't likely to shift this money to other banks easily. Due to this mismatch in growth, the gap between credit and deposit growth has widened from 1.8 percentage points in December to 5.4 percentage points as of June 15, according to data from the RBI. This has led to the credit-to-deposit ratio of banks  -  which is the percentage of a bank's deposits deployed as loans  - widening to 82.5% as of June 15 from around 75% in mid-2025.

This means for every Rs 100 of deposits, banks deploy Rs 82.5 for loans, which squeezes profits after accounting for operational, marketing, funding and other costs. The slowdown was also noted in the Reserve Bank of India's Financial Safety Report released last week. "Even as the banking system's resilience remains intact, funding is emerging as a key challenge.

Banks' liability profile is shifting from low-cost current and savings accounts (CASA) to higher-cost term deposits and CDs (certificate of deposit), pushing up the marginal cost of funds," the report noted. Banks shifting to other funding avenues As CASA deposits have slowed, banks have shifted to other sources of funds such as term deposits and CDs. "The growth in term deposits continued to outpace that of current and savings account deposits, indicating sustained preference for interest-bearing term deposits," RBI's report said.

Term deposits refer to financial instruments where one locks in their money for a particular tenure to earn interest in return. This includes retail options such as fixed and recurring deposits. A CD is a type of term deposit used by corporates and institutions to raise money through the money markets.

"CASA is the low-cost liability available to banks. Additionally, on a behavioural pattern perspective, CASA can support creation of longer-tenure assets. CDs, on the other hand, have historically been used to manage shorter-duration liquidity by banks," said Rohan Mandora, associate director at Equirus Securities.

As a result, the share of CASA in the total deposit base of the banking system has fallen to around 39% from a peak of around 44% in FY22 (during the post-Covid liquidity boom). Meanwhile, the share of term deposits has inched up to all-time highs of over 61% from around 56% in FY23. "CASA deposits have been under pressure for the past three years.
