Category: Editorial
Title: Ashok Lavasa writes Jantar Mantar taught us Part Two

Ashok Lavasa writes | Jantar Mantar taught us what democracy means, beyond elections

Meanwhile, the silent majority watches the drama from a distance, either sympathetic but lacking courage, or aligned with the rulers and indifferent to the cause of the protest. The State Calculus and the Defiance of Irreverent Youth Because of the students and the youth, people got vicariously associated owing to their emotional relationship with the protesting youth. The ruthlessness shown by the police in subduing them evoked large-scale condemnation.

Such brutality becomes the default response of those wielding arms when they see the government forsaking the political initiative. In fact, the government's indifference was perhaps a signal to the police to handle it in the only way they are trained to. The sudden shift in the Police Commissioner signalled the government's intent, and the removal of Sonam Wangchuk, wrapped in white sheets, exposed its devious design.

The mass upsurge upset the plan. The government didn't realise it was dealing with protesters who were defiant not because they were rebellious but because of their irreverence for authority. The source of their strength was a careless courage that made light of braving the odds. They mocked authorities in a way that frustrated the might of the state.

After all, the movement itself was the result of their being mocked by a supreme judicial authority, who later explained the context of the comment, but by then the malevolent seed had been sown. Fortunately, the government realised it was dealing with cockroaches that can't be easily crushed. An effective protest should never be wasted, as it contains lessons for all the stakeholders.

First, people must learn to speak without being scared of those they elected as their representatives. Democracy is not a "form of government" achieved because of the provisions in the Constitution; it is to be practised daily, beyond the day of the polls, every succeeding day by seeking accountability with greater vigour and authority. Secondly, those wielding force must realise that such events eventually leave them discredited as political leaders use them as scapegoats, creating more ill will between them and the people.

Thirdly, those elected must not pretend to be "sevaks" because sevaks seldom have inflated egos and arrogance. If those in power remain deaf to people's demands, they will be made to eat the humble pie in the long run. The government must fulfil all commitments to the agitators sincerely, including revamping the education and examination system.

The process of withdrawing FIRs filed must begin at once. Those who participated in the agitation shouldn't be penalised, not only by not filing fresh cases but also by ensuring that this is not used against them at the time of police verification for government jobs or when they seek passports. Finally, what augurs well for democracy is that if a chaiwala can rise to the top, people's power can throw up relatively unknown challengers who can bring the powerful to their knees.

In a democracy, it may not be enough to win the battle of the ballot. All battles are eventually won at the negotiating table, sometimes by gracefully accepting defeat. Written by: Ashok Lavasa The writer is a former election commissioner
