Category: Editorial
Title: At the Critical Minerals Ministerial India Part Two

At the Critical Minerals Ministerial, India should list four priorities

Similarly, breaking China's chokehold would require investments in substitutes, such as using iron or manganese in place of cobalt for batteries, along with innovations and design improvements that make magnets less dependent on rare earths. While the MSP and TRUST emphasise a focus on R&D and tech sharing, these must be further strengthened. Additionally, critical minerals are not the same as oil in that they can be recovered from their source and reused.

Recycling is often an underappreciated facet of mineral security, even though it offers a way to bypass China's overbearing processing capabilities. In fact, the world may be reaching a tipping point after decades of consistent mining have sharply decreased ore grades and quality. In Chile, the world's largest producer of copper, mining waste has higher-grade copper than primary production sites.

However, as seen in the case of lithium over the past few years, unusually low prices of Chinese primary production can disincentivise recycling. Less than 3 per cent of lithium's global demand currently comes from recycling. Procurement policies with guaranteed price floors between partner countries would be essential to tackle this.

India has the potential, even as a late entrant, to be a hub for recycling and must position itself as such. Finally, even as India has signed several agreements with resource-rich countries, Indian firms are constrained by limited financial resources and technological expertise to be globally competitive. International partnerships may help Indian firms with access to deeper capital pools.

The MSP, for instance, helps streamline due diligence efforts and identify projects for co-investment. At least one Indian project  -  a lithium refining capacity in Brazil  -  is currently funded by this, but Indian firms may be hesitant to expand in politically unstable regions. India must negotiate for blended-finance mechanisms that offer a political backstop and safety net for such endeavours through joint risk-sharing.

By Shobhankita Reddy The writer is a researcher in technology geopolitics at the Takshashila Institution, Bangalore. Views are personal
