Category: Editorial
Title: At years end robust growth signs that Part Two

At year's end, robust growth, signs that economy weathered the storms

Direct benefit transfers to women, which are estimated at upwards of Rs 2 lakh crore, also supported consumption. On the monetary front, the RBI's Monetary Policy Committee cut the repo rate by a cumulative 125 bps in calendar year 2025. It also announced a 100-bps cut in the cash reserve ratio, as well as regulatory easing and open market operations to improve transmission, facilitate bank lending and stabilise bond markets.

We expect GDP growth of 6.7 per cent and inflation at 5 per cent, largely driven by the low base effect, in fiscal 2027. Tax collections should improve as nominal GDP growth picks up on the back of robust real growth and a moderate increase in inflation. However, the government's ability to invest will be constrained by the need for fiscal prudence.

There are encouraging signs of a belated pick-up in private corporate capex, which we will closely monitor. It is worth pointing out that the nature of private investment is also undergoing a change. We estimate that over fiscals 2026 to 2030, the production-linked incentive scheme and emerging sectors combined are set to account for a quarter of the country's capex, up from 12 per cent in fiscals 2021-2025.

Data centres serve as a prime example in this context. With several technology multinationals committing to investments in India's data centre, cloud and AI ecosystem, this segment is likely to witness robust growth and sustained investment in the medium term. The scope for further policy rate cuts this fiscal is limited, but transmission of the already announced cuts will continue to support the economy, as monetary policy effects typically operate with a lag.

The government is pushing ahead with domestic reforms, including deregulation, to improve the business climate and enhance the economy's growth potential. This should support the initial signs of a lift in private investment. We expect foreign capital inflows to recover next year and strengthen the rupee.

There are signs of a pick-up in FDI with global tech majors announcing big investment plans for India. Reaching a trade agreement with the US is expected to reduce uncertainty and improve confidence, encouraging capital inflows into India. By Dharmakirti Joshi The writer is Chief Economist, Crisil Limited
