Category: Editorial
Title: Ayni exit may limit regional outreach Part Two

Ayni exit may limit regional outreach

In recent years, Central Asia has been increasingly attracting global actors seeking dependable sources of critical minerals and energy, primarily to reduce its dependence on China. Since 2022, Russia's focus on Ukraine and Western sanctions have prompted Central Asian nations to adopt a multi-vector diplomatic approach aimed at regional stability, territorial integrity, and sovereignty, strengthening their ties with the European Union (EU), the US, Türkiye, China, and the Gulf states to develop new connectivity routes, such as the Middle Corridor and the Eastern Route of International North-South Transport Corridor. Even the EU has increased its engagement with the five resource-rich Central Asian nations in regional connectivity, trade, and energy.

In 2024, it announced investments of roughly $10.6 billion in the Middle Corridor, followed by another $13.2 billion in 2025 in critical minerals and energy sectors. Türkiye is leveraging the Organisation of Turkic States and Pan-Turkism to build strategic partnerships, signing infrastructure projects to expand its influence in the Caucasus and Central Asia. The recent White House summit marking the tenth anniversary of the C5+1 initiative brought together leaders from Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan amid China's export curbs on key minerals and technologies.

While the US policy on Central Asia has shifted from non-intervention to pragmatic engagement, it lacks strategic clarity, often limiting regional initiatives by like-minded nations including India. For instance, the US revocation of sanction waiver on India's development of Iran's Chabahar Port disrupted India's connectivity projects with Central Asia. Although Washington later restored a six-month waiver, investor confidence has weakened.

Over three decades, India has deepened ties with Central Asia across military technology, defence, counterterrorism, and economic cooperation, supported by long-standing cultural links. Since 2010, Central Asian countries have also sought stronger ties with India to diversify their strategic alliances. Granting India access to the Ashgabat Agreement enabled it to enhance Eurasian connectivity and access to resources.

Central Asian nations also see the Chabahar port as an opportunity to diversify export markets and counterbalance China's influence. Though India's withdrawal from the Ayni airbase may limit its regional outreach, it reinforces its traditional reliance on cultural and civilisational diplomacy. As geopolitical competition intensifies in Central Asia, India will have to prioritise transparent and reliable connectivity strategies while leveraging its diplomatic and intellectual capital to strengthen its role as a trusted regional partner.

Harsh V Pant & Ayjaz Wani are respectively Vice-president, Studies and Foreign Policy, & Fellow, Eurasia, Observer Research Foundation
