Category: Editorial
Title: Banking likely to be steady in FY Part Two

Banking likely to be steady in FY27

That can mean Sensex crossing the 80,000-mark. This will be a consideration for those who weigh the two markets all the time. Bank deposits did gain substantially in March with an increase of Rs 10.39 lakh crore of the Rs 31.15 lakh crore witnessed during the year, which is almost a third of the incremental deposits.

While a part of the increase was due to the year-end phenomenon, the war's impact on stock markets also contributed to this migration. The Sensex fell by 11.5% in March. It is believed that while a high deposit growth of 13.5% won't be maintained, it would be in the region of a steady 10-12%. And if the repo rate is increased during the course of the year, it could touch the upper end of this estimate.

Therefore, banking business will be steady and should contribute well to GDP growth. Last year, growth for the component of GDP denoted under "financial, real estate, IT, dwelling" was 9.9%. It should be 9-10% if deposits and credit maintain the growth rates forecast for the year. Banks will have two primary concerns.

The first is the quality of assets. The present situation of stressed supply chains and higher cost of petro-based inputs could persist even if the war ends soon. This will impact profit and loss accounts of companies in sectors such as petrochemicals, fertilisers, paints, glass, ceramics, textiles, and auto.

Smaller units are more vulnerable, so they will need close monitoring. The second is that new investment projects or expansion would be cautious in the first half of the year, which means the focus has to be on alternatives. A related issue concerns the space of treasury income. Typically, higher interest rate regimes mean lower profits but higher margins on credit.

This can be a likely scenario especially if the RBI increases rates (based on evolving conditions). At any rate, the regime of declining interest rates appears to have ended, so the possibilities of an upside in treasury income are limited. This is reflected in bond yields which have been intransigent for quite some time.

Written by Madan Sabnavis The writer is Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda.
