Category: Editorial
Title: Banking likely to be steady in FY Part One

Banking likely to be steady in FY27

For banks, two primary concerns will be quality of assets and the prospect of caution around new investment projects or expansion in the first half. The banking sector fared quite creditably in FY26 notwithstanding tariff threats and war. Bank deposits grew by 13.5% and credit by 16.1%. The question now is, how will business be in FY27?

Several developments in March and April have a bearing on banking this year. The GDP growth number is the primary factor that will guide bank credit growth. While there are links with nominal GDP growth, it can be said with reasonable confidence that a double-digit growth rate looks likely more on account of a higher GDP deflator than a real GDP growth rate.

The latter would slow down to 6.9%, according to the RBI. The Budget had spoken of a growth rate of 10% in nominal GDP, which could be exceeded given the higher inflation potential this year on account of both the war as well as possible monsoon effects with El Niño developments later in the year. Growth in credit could thus be more in the region of 12-14%, which is still impressive albeit lower than last year.

Growth across sectors is something to watch out for. It appears companies in the larger size bracket would come back to the investment board this year. War may create delays as there is just too much uncertainty. More important is the action that the government may take on petrol prices. Although there may not be any immediate price hike, budgetary concerns will cause a change in view at some point.

This can upset the consumption story. Also, there is a possibility of rate hikes this year, which the OIS (overnight index swap) market indicates. These factors will play on the mind of companies which could be looking to invest in capital. So, it looks like retail credit will be the driver once again, and housing and auto loans will be the focus.

Gold loans may be less buoyant given that prices have come down and it is believed that the boom may be behind us. Unless there is a direct impact on job creation and therefore income, retail credit will be on the upward trajectory this year. Curiously, the threat to employment is linked more to AI and its proliferation than the war.

Other sectors like agriculture and micro, small, and medium enterprises would be on a steady path with their nature of mandated credit likely to help maintain momentum. The services segment typified by trade and non-banking financial companies would also continue to see traction. For the former, a growing economy augurs well while for the latter, funds from banks are like a raw material needed for business.

The fate of deposits is interesting. All this while, there has been considerable competition from the capital market. In a declining interest rate scenario, households in particular have tended to look for alternatives, especially in the capital market. Interestingly, while small savings offer higher returns than deposits, the shift has been marginal.

It is the capital market that provides a viable alternative with returns of 10-14% depending on circumstances. Is the capital market well-valued today? This is a call that investors have to take. The major correction seen due to the war has meant there can be a smart upside purely on the grounds of returning to a past equilibrium.
