Category: Editorial
Title: Being lonely Part Three

Being lonely

Resident Welfare Association (RWA) activities in colonies are a blessing for the elderly who are physically restricted. When my grandmother was paralyzed, she found great refuge and plenty of company in the weekly colony meetings which she attended in her wheelchair. As formal structured learning and decision-making decreases, it becomes essential for the elderly to supplement their mental development with socialisation.

If one could keep learning by enrolling in various classes (a plethora of which are available free of cost), it would keep both the memory and intellect ticking as well as provide a cohort of like-minded people. At the governmental level, infrastructure such as free common spaces like parks, libraries, and artisan-rich haats can help people connect. The government can also ensure through their administrative services that counsellors and self-help groups are appointed in every village.

Young adolescents can benefit from the wisdom of elders. Stories of graceful fortitude such as those exhibited by refugees who lost entire families and material possessions during the partition of India and had to strike out on their own with limited means can inspire the young generation to take hardships and loss in their stride. We can deliberately build in mindful inclusion in our professional lives.

As a young student studying in the NHS system in the UK, my son would make it a point to spend hours talking to elderly patients who found it difficult to express themselves due to stroke or speech impediments. I too have learnt from my son to spend those extra few minutes talking to the patient when I go on ICU or ward calls in a hospital. The basics of improving loneliness involve open-mindedness and a kind heart.

We can contribute strongly to mitigating this phenomenon ~ individually or collectively, in diverse ways ~ engaging with staff more meaningfully, calling up our elderly relatives, sharing our own experiences of loneliness, adopting a stray ~ there is no lone answer. By ANJALI MEHTA (The writer is a Delhi-based medical practitioner)
