Category: Editorial
Title: Being lonely Part Two

Being lonely

The mindless pursuit of more power and money makes people sacrifice time with family and friends as they chase one corporate target after another. A deep connection with screens rather than humans or Nature is also a cause for feeling bereft. When performance-oriented workers retire, they lose the somewhat comforting sense of recognition brought on by the position they occupy; and since many have not developed genuine rich relationships with their own family and outside-of-work friends, they can suddenly find themselves feeling very isolated.

The prevailing legal system in India may also be fostering loneliness. The anti-conversion laws of some states discourage people from practising another religion as it requires notifying the government of the shift. It also requires proof of no collusion, adding practical challenges. In the recent past, these laws have been (mis)used to harshly crack down on citizens, most commonly minorities.

New labour laws allow extended working shifts of 12 hours (compared to the traditional eight), leaving less time for employees to engage with friends and family. Even the recent stray dog judgement ignorantly penalised and restricted various aspects of free bonding between humans and street animals. Whereas the wealthy can afford domestic pets, stray dogs have been a great source of companionship for poorer people who don't have as much space in their homes.

Loneliness has several negative effects on the body and mind. Well-documented studies in public health journals like Lancet and psychiatry and medical journals reveal that it can significantly increase the risk of depression and anxiety. It may promote suicide ideation. It is known to hasten cognitive decline and increase the risk of Alzheimer's by up to 31 per cent in large population studies.

As per a large meta-analytical study from the journal Heart, it also increases the risk of stroke and cardiovascular disease by 32 and 29 per cent respectively. Lonely people are more likely to perform poorly at work and have lower immunity. The interim report of the World Health Organization (WHO) Commission on Social Connection (launched in 2023) has found a prevalence of loneliness in one out of every six people.

Lower income countries and the teenage demographic are more impacted by loneliness. The UK was the first country to start a ministry of loneliness and a national policy to combat loneliness in 2018. An interesting development has been 'social prescription', wherein doctors customize and prescribe social integration activities which are then implemented through community link agents.

Japan followed suit in 2021 with its own loneliness ministry as there was a spurt in suicide rates especially amongst women and children in the 2020s. Several European countries, though they may not have a formal ministry, do have comprehensive policies to combat loneliness. Many policies include increasing the provision of shared public and community spaces and designing or residences that facilitate interaction.

How impactful these measures have been is not easy to quantify but questionnaires are routinely designed and data gathered. In India, government counsellors are available at primary health centers and various NGOs help relieve some of the isolation especially faced by elderly people. How can we mitigate loneliness?

Having a common cause greater than oneself which can impact our lives positively provides a deep sense of purpose and happiness, staving off loneliness. It has also been historically useful to build such bridges for collective action ~ for example, mitigating global warming and fighting for human rights. Group interactions should be an important focus of urban planning.
