Category: Editorial
Title: Belownormal rainfall blues Part Two

Below-normal rainfall blues

There is a similar result if the growth of agricultural production as a whole is considered. Average annual growth averaged 2.4% in years of below-normal and deficient rainfall. The agricultural sector grew faster at an average annual rate of 5% in years of normal and above-normal rainfall. As Indian agriculture substantially depends on rain-fed systems, the spectre of drought is ever present due to fluctuations in precipitation.

The probability of such occurrences is as high as 35%, according to the official Economic Survey 2024-25, which adds that the risk is not uniform across the countryside and varies considerably based on geographies. So even if there is no nationwide drought with below-normal and deficient rainfall, districts in several states will be hit. All of this underscores the need for region-specific strategies to mitigate drought risk.

Thanks to a landmark Supreme Court ruling in 2016, the government released a revised manual for drought management which should help in timely declaration of drought conditions to ensure immediate welfare measures. Below-normal rainfall blues compound the bleak outlook for the farm economy due to the West Asian conflict since end-February. The Strait of Hormuz, which is now blockaded by both Iran and the US, is also a vital artery for natural gas supplies for producing nitrogen fertilisers and sulphur used to make phosphatic fertilisers.

As if the prospects of low rainfall are not bad enough, shortages and higher costs are bound to impact the forthcoming kharif season if vital inputs cannot get through the Strait. As El Niño conditions - which are expected to prevail till January 2027 - weaken the monsoon, contingency plans to combat the likelihood of drought due to deficient rainfall should be a top policy imperative. Written by N Chandra Mohan Erosion of fiduciary resilience INDIAN IT SERVICE providers are reportedly stepping back from large long-term deals because they sense future disruption or lower margins.

These are undoubtedly useful ways for navigating technological shifts such as AI, but they often make it easier to overlook a less fashionable yet more consequential reality: the erosion of fiduciary resilience. By "fiduciary resilience", I mean the capacity to honour commitments when doing so is financially inconvenient. In an environment defined by rapid exits and shifting loyalties, professional integrity may be mispriced.

It is treated as a sentimental legacy when it is, in fact, a sophisticated form of risk control. Staying with an inconvenient obligation is not simply a moral stance; it is a calculated financial decision that recognises the long-term cost of reputational decay. This logic is anchored in the reality that most economic systems are not open fields of infinite opportunity, but rather closed loops where actions do not disappear but instead accumulate.

This accumulation shapes future trust. While markets may reward the clean break in the short term, especially when it improves immediate margins or simplifies a complex balance sheet, clients possess a long memory regarding who remains engaged when conditions turn volatile. Reputation behaves like capital in this sense, compounding with agonising slowness over decades but possessing a half-life that can decay almost instantly upon a single perceived abandonment of duty.

For decades within the Indian IT services sector, Tier-1 firms built global franchises on managed services contracts that were predictable, labour-intensive, and deeply dependent on the stability of long-term relationships. Stability mattered. For many years, I helped the largest clients of Indian service providers structure multi-year relationships to maximise their value while being fair to the providers.
