Category: Editorial
Title: Breathing space for RBI Part Two

Breathing space for RBI

Apart from the fact that the projected CPI inflation for 2026-27 is half a percentage point higher that the projection at the time of the April meeting, headline inflation is expected to be very close to the upper limit of the 4+/- 2 per cent band in Q3, with a softening in the next quarter, though. As per the latest bi-monthly household inflation expectation survey conducted by the RBI, the inflation expectations for the next three months and one year edged up by 80 basis points and 50 basis points, respectively, reaching 9.3 per cent for both horizons. All in all, the upside risks to CPI inflation for the rest of 2026-27 seem obvious and the MPC's take in this regard is grounded in reality.

These developments would call for a tightening of the policy rate in a pre-emptive manner under the inflation-targeting framework. However, 'the MPC felt it would be prudent to wait for greater clarity to emerge'. In plain terms this means that if the projected inflation for 2026-27 is required to be further raised at the time of the next MPC meeting to be held in early August  -  the likelihood of which seems high  -  a hike in policy rate would be a near certainty.

External sector measures Given the country's high dependence on imported crude oil, LPG and fertilizers, on the one hand, and on short-term debt and portfolio flows for funding its current account deficit and for reserves growth, on the other, the standard metrics such as import cover etc. do not apply to it. Instead, for the sake of practicality, the adequacy of only the foreign currency assets (FCA), net of forward selling commitments should be assessed by applying the Modified Greenspan Guidotti (MGG) rule.

Net FCA as on March 31, 2026 was $450 billion and short-term external debt (by residual maturity) was about $330 billion. The coverage of FCA in relation to the current account deficit combined with short-term external debt, applying the MGG rule on this date was only a little over 100%, which does not indicate a very comfortable situation. The co-ordinated measures of the Government and the RBI, referred to in the foregoing, will likely spur financial capital inflows.

Two of them, namely concessional forex swap to be provided till September 30, 2026 to incentivise ECBs by PSUs, and a similar facility for bearing the full hedging cost to be provided till September 30, 2026 to AD banks for raising fresh 3 - 5-year FCNR (B) deposits are quasi-fiscal in nature, which central banks are well-advised to avoid. However, given the trend of robust income growth of the RBI in recent years, it should be possible for it to absorb the cost of doing so. One hopes that the forward legs of the swaps are recognised and periodically revalued like all other outstanding forward foreign exchange contracts of the RBI and a full disclosure is made in this regard in its annual audited financial statements.

One also hopes that the RBI adheres to the end date of September 30, 2026 for these facilities, as announced, and no extension thereof is allowed. By Himadri Bhattacharya The writer is a former central banker and a consultant to the IMF. (Through The Billion Press)
