Category: Editorial
Title: Breathing space for RBI Part One

Breathing space for RBI

Rate hike in the next cycle looks highly likely As widely expected, the Monetary Policy Committee of the Reserve Bank took a unanimous decision to keep the policy rate unchanged at 5.25 per cent at the end of its second bi-monthly meeting of the current fiscal on June 5. The MPC also voted in favour of continuation of the neutral stance. By all indications, the coordinated measures announced by the Government and the RBI on the very same day to attract more foreign capital to India drew significant attention and scrutiny on the part of all concerned.

In the aftermath of all this, the ten-year G-Sec yield fell a bit, while equity markets ended lower. The rupee posted its biggest one-day gain since April. Growth and inflation outlook The impacts of the headwinds emanating from the on-going Middle East conflict on the growth and inflation prospects of the Indian economy are now clear and obvious: Real GDP growth for 2026-27 is now projected lower at 6.6 per cent vis- à-vis 6.9 per cent at the time of the last policy two months earlier.

Added to the conflict-related factors, is the possibility of a below normal monsoon and El Nino conditions. In the MPC's view, prolonged global supply chain disruptions, heightened volatility in global financial markets, and weather-related shocks continue to pose downside risks to the domestic growth outlook. While this assessment may be realistic for the short run, there are gathering concerns surrounding the country's long-term growth story: The vulnerability of India's external sector and its macroeconomic prospects, in general, to oil price shocks has not reduced significantly since the BoP crisis of 1990-91.

The country is not yet a big or even a visible player in the new-age major technology areas such as microchip manufacturing, electric vehicles and AI. There are no signs of any buoyancy in its equity market, driven by AI-fuelled optimism. At the same time, the growth of AI in quite a few other major economies now poses a threat to India's services sector, dampening investment and exports.

These features have negative implications for the country's current account as well as capital account inflows by way of FDI and FPI. The delay in a trade agreement with the US is also a negative. A view is gaining ground that the factors underlying the current external sector difficulties of India are mostly endogenous in nature.

The exogenous shocks emanating from the US-Iran conflict have only acted as a trigger. Hence, the situation calls for bold and pragmatic reforms in both the real and the financial sectors and for enhancing energy security. CPI inflation for 2026-27 has been projected at 5.1 per cent with Q1 at 4.2 per cent; Q2 at 5.1 per cent; Q3 at 5.9 per cent; and Q4 at 5.4 per cent.

Core inflation is projected at 4.7 per cent for 2026-27  -  a rise by a full percentage point vis-à- vis 2024-25. In MPC's assessment, demand pressures in the economy remain contained but indications of the cost-push phenomenon are already visible, with higher energy prices and an increase in several input prices resulting in a sharp spike in WPI inflation in April 2026. In the MPC's reckoning, there are upside risks to the projected CPI inflation due to global supply chain disruptions and monsoon shortfall.
