Category: Editorial
Title: BRICS bank at a crossroads Part Two

BRICS bank at a crossroads

Just as the African Development Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank are now allowed to use re-channelled SDRs as hybrid capital, the NDB should explore the same route. SDRs lying idle on central bank balance sheets can be re-channelled to the NDB as hybrid capital. This would not require budgetary outgo, nor will such assets cease to be reserve assets as per the IMF, but would significantly enhance the NDB's capital adequacy and borrowing capacity.

Third, it must treat transition finance for hard-to-abate sectors as a public good and change who it lends to. This is because most of these are in the private sector -  be it steel in India, cement in Brazil, or chemicals in South Africa  -  while over 85% of NDB lending has historically gone to the public sector. If the NDB has to finance transition, it must develop instruments to lend directly to the private sector  -  through blended finance, guarantees, first-loss covers, and equity.

Fourth, there has also been an emphasis on local currency lending. While local currency lending is welcome as it shields unhedged borrowers from forex volatility, its value depends on whether the capital is sourced domestically or mobilised from savings-surplus economies. To be additional, capital must be mobilised from savings-surplus economies and converted into local currency.

For a capital-importing, investment-starved economy like India, rupee loans raised in the domestic market merely recycle the same pool of domestic savings tapped by banks, development finance institutions (DFIs), and the capital market. The benefit then is structural, not quantitative  -  extending maturities to 20-25 years where domestic banks/DFIs face asset-liability constraints  -  but it does not augment overall investible resources for transition. India has a major stake in this reform.

India is one of the largest beneficiaries of NDB lending and has the most to gain from its enhanced lending capacity. With its rapidly growing steel, cement, and other hard-to-abate sectors, India needs transition finance much more than any other BRICS member. The NDB can fill this gap, provided it reorients its strategy.

The forthcoming BRICS summit is the right occasion to reorient its focus. The NDB's next decade should not be about doing more of the same green projects that other MDBs are doing. It should be about doing what others aren't  - financing the difficult transition of hard-to-abate sectors. For that, member countries must empower the NDB with more efficient capital use, more capital through SDR re-channelling, and a mandate to lend to the private sector.

By Janak Raj The writer is a senior fellow, Centre for Social and Economic Progress (CSEP), New Delhi.
