Category: Editorial
Title: BRICS bank at a crossroads Part One

BRICS bank at a crossroads

As the New Development Bank completes a decade, it must shift from green to transition finance, focusing on hard-to-abate sectors and enhancing capital efficiency to support sustainable growth in BRICS countries. As BRICS leaders meet for their forthcoming summit, the role of the New Development Bank (NDB) will again be in focus. Created as an alternative development finance institution for the Global South, the NDB has completed a decade.

It has a big role to play in financing sustainable infrastructure in BRICS countries. But to remain relevant for climate action, it must make a crucial shift in its focus  -  from green finance to transition finance. So far, the focus of climate mitigation globally has been on energy transition  - financing solar, wind, and electric vehicles (EVs).

This is important, but it is not enough. To achieve net zero, we must finance the decarbonisation of eight hard-to-abate sectors: steel, cement, aluminium, chemicals, fertilisers, aviation, shipping, and long-haul trucking. These sectors account for over 40% of global CO2 emissions and are difficult to decarbonise, especially because of their production processes.

Hard-to-abate sectors need special attention in emerging economies for three reasons. First, they are growing fast. For instance, in India both steel and cement production are projected to increase by nearly 80% by 2030. Similar growth trajectories are expected in other sectors and in other BRICS economies, barring China.

Second, hard-to-abate sectors need much more funding than energy transition. A recent CSEP study suggests that steel and cement sectors need ten times more funding than energy transition. Third, financing for these sectors is not easy to come by. The established multilateral development banks (MDBs) like the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) have limited appetite for them, as they are seen as high-emission and high-risk.

Private capital avoids them because they are first-of-a-kind, high-cost, and high-risk not because they are scientifically unproven. Carbon capture and storage technology is proven but expensive to deploy. It is precisely for these reasons that the NDB must step in. If the NDB does not finance the transition of these sectors, no one else will.

Green finance funds the already green; transition finance funds the brown to become green. It is time the NDB moved decisively in this direction. However, the NDB in its present form cannot finance this transition at scale as its lending capacity is severely constrained. It, therefore, needs to move on four fronts.

First, the NDB must improve its capital efficiency. Currently, its equity-to-loan ratio is conservative, with a leverage of less than 2.5. In contrast, the World Bank and the ADB operate with a leverage of 4-5 times. The NDB, therefore, under-utilises its capital. With better risk management, portfolio diversification, and a stronger credit rating process, the NDB can safely lend much more from the same capital base.

The recent reforms in World Bank's Capital Adequacy Framework show that higher leverage is possible without jeopardising AAA or AA+ ratings. Second, its capital base itself needs to be augmented. The NDB's paid-in capital is only $10.5 billion against a subscribed capital of $50 billion and authorised capital of $100 billion.

It is difficult for member countries to contribute fresh capital as most of them are fiscally constrained. Once the NDB has achieved capital efficiency of the level of World Bank/ADB, it must explore other options to augment its lending capacity. This is where the re-channelling of special drawing rights (SDRs) becomes relevant.
