Category: Editorial
Title: Bringing women to the helm of water Part Two

Bringing women to the helm of water management

The ongoing projects include Rejuvenating Watershed for Agricultural Resilience through Innovative Development Programme to help national and State institutions to adopt improved watershed management practices to increase farmers' resilience to climate change and promote higher productivity and better income; the Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernisation Project enhances productivity and climate resilience of irrigated agriculture and improves water management; Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture on access to climate-resilient seed varieties and production technologies; Kerala Climate-resilient Agri-value Chain Modernization Project to adopt the climate change and promote agri-entrepreneurship; and the International Rice Research Institute's project to provide technical support for scaling up sustainable and climate-resilient rice-based cropping systems. The appreciable factor is that all these projects give special priority and representation to women, and it will help in enhancing their leadership in water and crop management during extreme climate impacts (flood and droughts) through the adaptation of innovative climate-resilient agriculture practices, which help in sustaining food and nutritional security. The lower percentage of women water professionals in South Asia is recognised as one ofthe constraints for gender sensitive water management.

At the same time,there is very little understanding among women water professionals about the scientific knowledge on water at the macro level. Most of the studies remain restricted to women's participation in community-based water programmes. After realising this fact, the South Asia Consortium for Interdisciplinary Water Resources Studies in India and Irrigation and Water Engineering Group at Wageningen University in the Netherlands have implemented the Crossing Boundaries Project in South Asia with an aim to contribute in capacity building on "Integrated water resources management and gender and water" through higher education, research, knowledge-based development and networking.

The project was funded by a grant-assistance from the Government of the Netherlands. Six South Asian institutions  -  Bangladesh Center for Advanced Studies and Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology in Bangladesh, Centre for Water Resources of Anna University in India, Nepal Engineering College in Nepal, Postgraduate Institute of Agriculture, University of Peradeniya in Sri Lanka, and the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in India  -  are partners in the project. Through this project (2002-2007), around 200 women water professionals obtained their Master's and Ph.

D. degrees in integrated water resources management with fellowships. Subsequently, the programme has been escalated in many academic and research institutions in South Asia. Most of the women water professionals, who are part of this programme, are with the Water Resources departments in the government and non-governmental sectors and universities and contributing significantly to water resources decision making (planning and management).

The way forward Water is an unavoidable element for the existence of human life (drinking, hygiene and sanitation and clean environment) and various economic activities (agriculture, livestock, fisheries and water intensive industries) which drive human development and welfare. Hence, water is a nucleus of stabilising society, where women's role is also significant. Realising the strong logical linkages between women and water, the need for women's participation in multiple layers of water governance should be accepted and promoted by various levels of governments and the public at large.

Prakash Nelliyat is a former Fellow, Centre for Biodiversity Policy and Law at the National Biodiversity Authority, Chennai; views expressed are personal
