Category: Editorial
Title: Brinkmanship in the age of growing conflict Part Two

Brinkmanship in the age of growing conflict

Russia's periodic sabre-rattling over nuclear restraint is also a legacy of the Cold War that Russian President Vladimir Putin wants to keep alive. The indiscriminate use of hypersonic and other area weapons against population centres such as Kiev by the Russians triggers a brinkmanship chain that is hard to control and infuse any semblance of restraint in the four-year-long conflict. Ever since China upped its maritime game since 2006 and laid claims to vast expanses of the South China Sea and parts of the East China Sea, it has mastered the art of controlled brinkmanship against weaker neighbours, daring them to push back against its attempts to establish maritime hegemony in the region.

Except for Japan which has pushed back strongly against Chinese coercion over claims on the Senkaku Islands, and Taiwan which continues to stare the People's Republic of China in the eye, all other countries with shores along the South China Sea have been mute to Chinese reclamation of Islands and claims on territorial waters. If there is one nation that has perfected the art of brinkmanship in the 21st century, it is North Korea. This largely underdeveloped and opaque country, with its demonstrated missile and nuclear prowess and nuclear proliferation, has kept the most powerful power in the world from forcing it into a 'rules based world order', while also keeping the region on edge.

The displacement of diplomacy India's strategic DNA of restraint and responsibility and its calibrated use of force eschews any inclination to resort to brinkmanship even under the gravest provocation. The fragile global geopolitical system is now fraught with danger, and diplomacy no longer seems to be the preferred choice for conflict resolution. With global institutions such as the United Nations increasingly marginalised, coercion, brinkmanship and the uncalibrated use of force seem to be emerging as preferred options in settling conflicts of various genres.

The world needs to seriously introspect this. By Arjun Subramaniam Military historian and a strategic analyst
