Category: Editorial
Title: Building legal and judicial capacity Part One

Building legal and judicial capacity

Judges need to be well equipped to handle increasingly complex cases relating to economic and regulatory matters The Government's end of year economic review announced that we have overtaken Japan to become the world's fourth largest economy. The review noted that India's gross domestic product has already reached about $4.18 trillion (€3.55 trillion), and is projected to reach $7.3 trillion by 2030. As our aspirations to play a leading role in the global economy increases, it is important for us to pay greater attention towards legal and judicial capacity building as a central facet of India's economic governance.

While 1991 ushered in the opening up of India's economy with an expanding role of the private sector, the last two decades have dramatically transformed India's corporate and commercial sector with significant impetus on laws relating to economic governance. The pre-1991 economic model was based upon courts handling mostly civil, criminal, land, and family-related legal disputes and not complex commercial transactions. However, the 1991 economic reforms led to a rise in FDI, infrastructure projects, private capital, corporate restructuring, banking and financial sector issues, and more recently, the evolution of a digital economy.

Judicial capacity building While we know that 4.78 crore cases are pending across all levels of the judiciary, government entities are involved in nearly 50 per cent of all litigation, a significant part of which is relating to tax, regulatory, infrastructure, and contract-related matters. Undoubtedly, within this broader data set, it needs to be noted that civil/commercial cases are significant. The corporate and commercial uncertainty is further exacerbated by the fact that among these cases, more than one crore are civil cases of which more than 57 per cent are pending for over a year.

The institutional expectations have also arisen significantly because of which commercial cases have grown exponentially  -  for example, IBC-related litigation has consistently increased over the years, and the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) alone has over 14,961 cases pending as of March 31, 2025. The unfortunate reality is the judiciary is still structurally designed through the framework of a 20th century dispute resolution model while trying to also deal with 21st century commercial realities. The World Bank's Doing Business 2020 indicators demonstrated that with high-level policy interventions, India could significantly improve its overall rankings (rank 63 in ease of doing business, an impressive jump from 142 in 2014).

However, the issue of legal and judicial capacity building remains a major challenge as India is still ranked a poor 163rd on enforcing contracts. It is not a good situation for the economic future of India if it takes nearly 1,500 days on average for a company to resolve a standard commercial dispute in a court of first instance. The World Bank's methodology is centred on time, cost, and the quality of judicial process.

Training the judges The five most important and influential areas of judicial adjudication where judges need to be intellectually engaged, their training pedagogically structured with long-term capacity building and education are: Corporate governance and company law: There is a need for training modules developed which focus on understanding board structures, fiduciary duties, related-party transactions, shareholder agreements, acquisition agreements besides new and emerging areas such as ESG, shareholder activism, and digital corporate governance. We need to build capacity within the State and National Judicial Academies through the involvement of academics, law firm partners, and industry regulators. Commercial contracts and complex transactions: Today's judges need to have an understanding of infrastructure contracts, PPP models, M&A structures, project finance, and construction contracts.
