Category: Editorial
Title: Building legal and judicial capacity Part Two

Building legal and judicial capacity

They are called upon to adjudicate disputes arising out of such matters. The existing knowledge based on understanding contract risk allocation, indemnities, warranties, and financial covenants needs to be substantially augmented to deal with domestic, international, and cross-border disputes that may get adjudicated in Indian courts. The Dubai International Financial Centre (DIFC) is a good example where it trains judges jointly with financial regulators on commercial and corporate structures.

Financial, banking, insurance and insolvency law: Our judges need to develop understanding of new insolvency frameworks, restructuring principles, and even valuation methodologies. Training and capacity building for law and economic analysis is absolutely essential for our judges. For example, US Bankruptcy Courts conduct specialised annual judicial education programmes sponsored by the Federal Judicial Centre.

Competition law and market economics: While the establishment of the Competition Commission of India has created new levels of expertise in these matters, the core judicial function requires basic knowledge and understanding of market definition, dominance assessment, and economic tools. For example, EU judges receive training by the European Judicial Training Network in industrial economics and market analysis. Technology, digital economy, and data governance: The speed with which issues relating to technology and AI are beginning to dominate the legal sector requires a better level of preparedness on the part of the judges.

Understanding IT contracts, IP agreements, fintech, crypto-assets, and appreciation of the interdisciplinary aspects of cyber security and AI governance has become essential. Courts in Singapore and Estonia have developed structured training on algorithmic accountability and AI-in-contract law. Chief Justice Surya Kant has already announced that addressing pendency will be one of his institutional priorities.

This objective can be met by a reimagination of the way Indian courts have dealt with corporate, commercial, and economic matters. By C Raj Kumar The writer is the Founding Vice Chancellor of O.P. Jindal Global University
