Category: Editorial
Title: Businesses cant ignore heat stress impact Part One

Businesses can't ignore heat stress impact

By leveraging cost-effective solutions, companies will protect workforce, improve retention, with positive impact on bottom line and a competitive advantage Climate risk continues to be one of the long-term risks for businesses flagged annually by the World Economic Forum's (WEF) risk report. Increasingly, it's also playing out in the short term. In India, heat stress repeatedly comes up as a severe near-term climate risk across all climate scenario analysis.

One can also rely on "lived experiences" of Indian workforce to understand the impact of heat stress. India is the seventh most vulnerable country to climate change, and rising temperatures combined with rapid urban growth are turning heat into a direct operational and financial risk in sectors such as logistics, construction, renewables, gig economy, and agriculture. The urgency of adaptation alongside mitigation has never been greater.

Macroeconomic data show that heat stress impacts labour productivity and poses infrastructure challenges such as equipment safety, increased power demand, and increased fire risk. The ILO reports that India faces the highest productivity loss from heat stress, accounting for nearly one-third of global labour-hour losses. Rapid urban expansion exacerbates the issue, with the urban heat island (UHI) effect turning cities into heat traps.

The IMD predicts heatwave frequency will double, and intensity will rise by 2-3°C. The impact on businesses is both operational and financial, and it becomes imperative for them to address this. National studies indicate a 1°C rise in temperature leads to ~2% drop in factory productivity. Peak electricity demand, reaching ~250 Gw in FY25, is projected to exceed ~366 Gw by FY32, causing early grid supply disruptions and increased reliance on costly backup power.

Increasing heatwaves frequently breach the 40°C threshold, escalating equipment fire risks. To address heat stress, businesses are building unified heat management strategy encompassing governance, physical infrastructure solutions, digital warning systems, and ecosystem solutions. The strategy is being tailored to the workforce's varying vulnerabilities based on heat exposure across archetypes such as outdoor workers facing high heat (farmers, solar plant workers, delivery drivers), mobile field workers (sales agents, construction, logistics industry), and indoor workers in non-air-conditioned spaces (factory, warehouse).

Effective solutions must target specific conditions faced by each group. Till date, corporate interventions have been mostly reactive, short-term and localised. Steps are generally taken in an ad-hoc manner, primarily limited to basic administrative guidelines  -  such as implementing flexible shift timings, introducing mandatory rest breaks in shaded zones, deploying mobile hydration stations, and offering culturally relevant local drinks  -  or introducing limited, small-scale trials of personal protective equipment, such as evaporative cooling jackets or wearable cooling solutions.

However, as the severity increases a lot more is being conceptualised and executed. Organisational resilience requires scaling up interventions with a road map encompassing governance, standardised operating procedures across sites, and solutions that go beyond ad-hoc measures. For instance, heat resilience must be anchored with senior-level executive ownership to institutionalise accountability on lines of safety.
