Category: Editorial
Title: Businesses cant ignore heat stress impact Part Two

Businesses can't ignore heat stress impact

This requires securing dedicated funding, establishing heat safety committees, and ensuring solutions are managed jointly across sustainability, HR, safety, administration, and site teams. Also, vulnerable operational zones (factories, logistic hubs, etc.) require heat audits, leading to SOPs for high-heat conditions, coupled with mandatory awareness training for workers and supervisors. Other long-term measures include on-site infrastructure  -  modifying assets (applying reflective roof coating, insulating high-heat machinery) and embedding heat resilience into design of new facilities using smart HVAC controls, advanced ventilation, and cooling-as-a-service models; blue-green infrastructure  -  use of nature-based cooling by incorporating water bodies, expanding vegetation, utilising natural shading for walkways, etc.; warning signals  -  real-time ambient monitoring systems and peer-monitoring programmes to detect early signs of heat illness, automated alerts during extreme spikes, and dynamic optimisation of outdoor work schedules; and asset and equipment resilience  -  upgrade of machinery to high-efficiency standards for operations beyond 45°C, revising fire safety protocols for exposed equipment, and procurement standard upgrade to ensure vendor performance at elevated temperatures.

Besides addressing risks, certain businesses also have significant opportunities to drive revenue via scalable, cost-effective solutions. As investment in climate adaptation and heat stress mitigation intensifies, existing as well as new companies can capitalise on economic opportunities. Focus on climate adaptation is intensifying.

The WEFs Heat Resilience Committee is driving CXO-level commitments on workforce protection with India as a key focus. CII has launched a coalition for climate resilience. Leading companies in India are taking steps in this direction, enabled both by empathy and a business case with support from climate organisations, NGOs, consulting firms, and startups that working on innovative solutions.

Adapting to extreme heat is a test for corporate India. By leveraging cost-effective solutions, companies will protect their workforce, improve retention, with positive impact on bottom line and a competitive advantage. Although the rains give us respite, it is now the time to act and prepare before we get battered by yet another summer.

By Ankit Todi, Chief Sustainability Officer, Mahindra Group
