Category: Editorial
Title: CAFE norms are too lenient Part Two

CAFE norms are too lenient

This could mean either that these features have merits or that the automakers in those countries are as a powerful as they are in India. As to the extent of truth in each is an empirical question. Suffice to say that the more lenient the emission (or fuel economy) standard and super-credits, stronger is the evidence of regulatory capture by the auto industry.

Unfortunately, the proposed level of super-credits, which is to be set at three to begin with in 2027, seems a bit generous. In any case the proposed norms provide no justification for this number. BEE's decision to re-solicit public comments on the current revised version, which are a little more stringent compared to original standards it put forward in 2024, is welcome.

However, in the opinion of this author, who submitted a public comment to BEE on the earlier version in 2024 calling for stronger standards, the proposed super-credits appear super-generous. The reason being that Lithium batteries and EV are near maturity with battery prices falling more than 10-fold in the last decade to below $100 per kWhr today internationally. Moreover, EVs are also already supported with various forms of subsidies such as lower GST, rebates on income tax, road tax, and charging equipment, and preferential electricity tariffs etc., which are not the point here.

But it does beg the question as to why in spite of all this electric cars remain costlier than what the cost of batteries suggest ought to be the difference in upfront cost. The auto industry might prefer to lay the blame on the cost of the technology for that is one way to convince policymakers to keep subsidizing them. But is that really the case?

And if this is the state of affairs after a decade of subsidies and no mandates, isn't the need of the hour stronger standards rather than weak regulations plus generous super-credits? If doing more of the same and expecting a different outcome is stupidity, then isn't this what finding new ways to soften the impact of EVs on internal combustion engine vehicles amounts to? Surely our policymakers are capable of holding powerful interest groups to higher standards if they can summon the political will.

A broader perspective on energy efficiency Speaking of larger policy frameworks and perspective concerns, there are many ways to increase energy efficiency and conservation such as making energy costlier through further taxation; rewarding voluntary improvements in efficiency (e.g. purchase of certain types of vehicles or the use cleaner modes such as public transportation); mandating improvement in efficiency (e.g. through minimum standards for fuel economy) or mandating disclosure of information (e.g.

fuel economy labels); and nudging voluntary action through education, information provision and by nurturing a sense of civic duty. Each of these has its benefits and costs. Taxation can increase inflation and is politically unpopular; rewarding people with subsidies burdens government finances; mandating efficiency generates fierce opposition from businesses which will need appeasement (the auto lobby in India is quite powerful); walking, biking, and public transit are perceived as slow, inconvenient and might even be unhealthy or unsafe given Indian traffic patterns; information in labels and stickers can be inaccurate or hard to process mentally, and last but not least voluntary action or charity rarely produces the scale of change needed when the situation is grave.
