Category: Editorial
Title: CAFE norms are too lenient Part One

CAFE norms are too lenient

Why fuel economy standards are important and how proposed revisions to CAFE norms fall short Fossil fuels today are at the root of multiple societal problems. Among the alternatives ways in which society can reduce consumption of fossil fuels, raising energy efficiency is perhaps the simplest and most economical policy to address many of those problems simultaneously. However, energy efficiency policies need to be designed carefully.

Specifically, let us consider the revisions to the Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards (CAFE) for passenger cars proposed by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency for 2027 to 2032. CAFE specifies an average carbon dioxide (CO 2 )-emission per kilometre target across all vehicles sold by an automaker. Given certain assumptions, a carbon standard is equivalent to a fuel economy standard and vice versa.

Phase I of CAFE lasted from 2017 to 2022. Phase II, which is in effect through 2027, lowered the upper-limit for average CO₂ emitted per km, and introduced additional credits for electric and hybrid vehicles to promote their adoption. The proposed Phase III norms for 2027 to 2032 mandate an even lower average emissions per km.

Currently, these norms are applicable for passenger vehicles with gross vehicle weight (GVW) below 3,500 kilograms, although similar norms for commercial trucks and buses are under consideration. A fundamental feature of India's CAFE norms, which is also their weakness, is that targets for carbon emissions (and fuel economy) are set based on vehicle weight with heavier vehicles such as SUVs allowed higher maximum emissions per km (i.e., a more lenient target) compared to that for smaller vehicles. This means firms selling more heavier vehicles (such as Tata and Mahindra) might find it less costly to meet their targets compared to automakers that mostly sell smaller cars (e.g.

Maruti), as incremental fuel economy gets harder as cars get more efficient. Heavy influence In simple terms, heavier cars have more lower hanging fruit to raise fuel economy. Therefore, smaller cars may see a greater proportional increase in cost compared to heavier cars. Although CAFE norms are not the primary reason for India's car market shifting towards large cars and SUVs in the last few years, targets based on weight can inadvertently make larger cars relatively more attractive.

With SUV and large makers already marketing their cars as safer because they are heavier, standards biased against small cars help strengthen their case and further drive down demand for smaller, more efficient cars. Of course, since heavier cars and SUVs are more expensive, weight based standards for passenger cars are also socially inequitable. A second feature of CAFE that was introduced in Phase II and is set to be retained at the same level in Phase III is called super-credits.

Super-credits allow the sale of each alternative fuel vehicles like pure battery EV, hybrid EVs or flex-fuel (ethanol) vehicles to be counted as if multiple units were sold. A super credit of 3 for pure battery EVs means, each EV sold is treated as three EVs sold for compliance purposes. This reduces the number of actual alternative and clean vehicles that need to be sold to achieve a given fuel economy or emission standard, which counteracts the objective of increasing demand for alternative technologies.

The simplest explanation for super-credits is that they are there to reduce the cost of compliance with any given standard and make the norms more palatable to automakers. Generous super-credits also reduce the incentive to innovate and become more competitive. Regulatory capture Interestingly, both weight-based standard and a form of super-credits feature in fuel economy standards in US, China and EU.
