Category: Editorial
Title: Can farmers ride the solar wave Part One

Can farmers ride the solar wave?

The question is no longer whether India can harvest the sun. It is whether farmers can own a meaningful share of that harvest India's solarising journey is a commendable one. Just before the Narendra Modi government was sworn in 12 years ago, the country had just 2.82 Gw of installed solar capacity.

By last month, this had risen to 168.04 Gw, making India the third-largest player in solar, after China and the US. Much of this (74%) is utility-scale, led by big companies like Adani Green Energy, ReNew, NTPC, JSW Energy, and Greenko Energy. Tata Power Solar is more into engineering, procurement, and construction.

Roof-top solar accounts for roughly 20%, and the remaining (about 6%) is off-grid and hybrid projects. The utility-scale solar model enabled rapid, cost-efficient deployment. These are ground-mounted solar parks, largely on degraded or wastelands given by the government. The biggest is Khavda Solar Park (30 Gw) coming up in Rann of Kutch.

Rooftop solar has picked up some momentum under the PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana, which aims to bring rooftop solar to one crore households. A household installing a 3-kilowatt (kW) system gets Rs 78,000 in central subsidy. States like Uttar Pradesh add another Rs 30,000, taking total support to Rs 1.08 lakh, against the estimated cost of Rs 1.8 lakh.

This amounts to a 60% subsidy. The Delhi government has gone even further and is ready to install free rooftop solar. Where the Modi government has not yet succeeded is the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha evam Utthan Mahabhiyan (PM-Kusum) scheme. The government had earlier envisioned it largely for solar pumps.

But component A of PM-Kusum does specify that farmers can have up to 2 Mw power plants on their land. But there was no subsidy. It is now time to rethink the PM-Kusum component A and provide capital subsidy. Further, ground-mounted solar projects on agricultural land need to be banned, as they directly conflict with food security.

India cannot afford that. The solution is agri-photovoltaics (agri-PV)  -  solar panels fixed at a height of about 11 feet, with due spacing that allows land to be fully cultivated beneath the panels. This is a dual use of land for producing food as well as energy. By giving a fillip to component A of PM-Kusum, the government can achieve three objectives simultaneously.

First, it can augment farmers' income eight-10 times. Second, it can reduce the government's power subsidy bill. Finally, it can produce clean energy that can help rural areas industrialise. To realise this, capital must be made accessible to farmers or farmer producer companies at rates that are applicable under priority sector lending, besides fixing the feed-in-tariff at half the cost of supplying power to rural areas under the current set-up.

PM Surya Ghar, in comparison, has an outlay of Rs 75,021 crore. The World Bank has also approved an $820 million loan, with concessional finance and a grant, to support PM Surya Ghar and mobilise private financing. PM-Kusum has no equivalent financing window. It is high time the World Bank also thought in terms of solar cooperatives on the lines of milk cooperatives under Operation Flood, and came forward to unleash a revolution in rural areas where solar becomes the "third crop" for farmers.
