Category: Editorial
Title: Care as disability justice dignity in mental Part Two

Care as disability justice, dignity in mental health

Rather than viewing these as competing frameworks, comprehensive care requires attention to diverse explanations and approaches simultaneously. On care practice People experiencing emotional and social crises or intense alienation require the space to grapple with these existential uncertainties. In contrast, dominant notions that locate these within biological or social determinants frameworks obscure these meaning-making dimensions of mental well-being.

As much as living in extreme housing precarity may limit opportunities to pursue what is personally meaningful, having a stable house or income alone cannot diminish feelings of disconnection from self and the world. While privileging tangible interventions such as medication, housing or cash transfers and grit and resilience building (which is not exclusively individual dependent) must assume greater importance, equally, care planning must highlight the need for relational work that engages with questions around vulnerabilities and invulnerabilities, purpose and existential incoherence, located in social-ecological contexts. In these ideas lie the foundations of disability justice, that embodies the spirit of liberation and wholeness, and not mere integration into an unequal world.

What if we thought critically, practised with solidarity, and pursued more longitudinal work that is real-world sensitive? Care would then be re-centred as the practice of relational justice and examine concerns that sustain distress and approaches that suffuse hope in complex scenarios. This could range from medications and economic security, to finding hope in spiritual practice, one's goals and community connection.

The focus shifts from treatment to 'what does this person need to live the life they want?', recognising that there are variegated and yet valid ways of understanding and responding to distress. A secondary yet important gain might address the one issue that affects all mental health work  -  engagement with a service and continuity of care. Many people who access a service are disillusioned and lose faith and trust for innumerable reasons.

This disengagement could often result in a downward spiral into states of despair, loneliness and homelessness. Building trust involves honest collaborations, dialogic practice and acceptance of non-linear outcomes. Justice beyond fair distribution of resources or services, as espoused by Sandel, becomes central; as a process of recognising what we owe to one another and the moral threads holding our relationships and society.

In mental health care, this means asking whether our systems centre dignity and account for the injustices that precipitated suffering, and, importantly, whether care can even be conceived without addressing the contexts that created harm in the first place. Transforming care, education and research Mental health education may need to prepare people to sit with discomfort and uncertainty, navigate the complexity of a person's social world, celebrate small wins, and remain open to diverse approaches. Research priorities require reorientation toward capturing the granular aspects of care rather than only large-scale, generalisable findings.

These actions require examining micro-level processes through implementation science and transdisciplinary methods that link practice and theory, enabling continuous learning about what works, for whom, and how. Most critically, those currently designated as non-specialists and those who bring lived experience need to be recognised and compensated as practitioners who bring community wisdom and contextual understanding that formal training cannot replicate, and receiving preparation and resources that enable them to engage with the same systemic support afforded to those with professional credentials. Vandana Gopikumar is with The Banyan and Banyan Academy of Leadership in Mental Health and is a mental health and social care practitioner and care systems researcher.

Lakshmi Narasimhan is with The Banyan and Banyan Academy of Leadership in Mental Health, and is a mental health and social care practitioner and care systems researcher
