Category: Editorial
Title: Care as disability justice dignity in mental Part One

Care as disability justice, dignity in mental health

Mental health care must be radically reimagined as the primary pursuit of dignity and disability justice that gives importance to equity, inclusion and diversity A 60-year-old recalls eating leftovers as a child, in the absence of his birth family, and, even today, is passively engaged with life. A survivor of childhood abuse says that she now views her problems as 'thoosi (dust'), but only after being homeless and battling insurmountable trauma. Then there is a recollection by someone of stark abuse while under psychiatric care, who was chained and forced to drink water from a washroom because they were deemed 'unmanageable'.

These stories embody suffering in ways that numerical data fail to capture. These are stories that spotlight how different people are impacted and respond differently to distress and care, based on their contexts and beliefs. A lack of commitment to unpack these narratives risks shrinking the immersive exploration that is warranted.

It may touch the surface of healing and venture a little beyond but will ultimately relegate the discourse that spotlights barriers, attitudes, social distances, and inadequate care systems to the margins. Yet, dominant approaches to psychosocial disability continue to view these experiences through a deficits lens, as they are focused on 'integration' into communities that hold stereotypical understandings of productive living, a reductionist imagination of 'the normal', and a social order that goes unquestioned. The gaps in mental health-care access continue to range from 70%-90% globally.

While third generation medications promise fewer side-effects and evidence-based therapies proliferate, the fundamental questions remain. The gaps We argue that mental health care must be radically reimagined as the primary pursuit of dignity and disability justice that centres equity, inclusion, and diversity, highlighting complexities with all their nuances; as the practice of staying with people and persisting alongside them through suffering, whether that suffering is relational, material, or structural in nature. Care in this lens is a process of individual-level meaning-making, responding to adverse life events, relational disruptions and existential queries, while fulfilling needs for safety, relationships, everyday wins, and problem-solving.

It is also a tussle between one's context and one's chosen path, complicating the narrative and the care plan. To untangle the knots between mental health and the social context we must start with asking what kind of world creates such suffering, and how can one standardise essential protocols while achieving personalisation at scale. Sustained material and relational deprivation, both as a cause and an outcome of mental ill health, often go unaddressed, resulting in a range of losses.

An example is found in the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data on suicides, which while reducing causes to monotonic categories as reported by police, shows that a third of suicides in India are due to family problems and another tenth due to relational ruptures. Feelings of shame, rejection, alienation and abandonment that underlie distress are rarely spoken about, limiting both the language and expression of psychic pain. Solutions often attempt to fix patterns (labelled 'maladaptive'), placing the onus for broken relationships, social withdrawal and loss of vitality squarely on the person.

Multiple explanations for distress may persist concurrently, ranging from biological (neurotransmitter alterations, inflammatory markers), psychological (learned patterns, cognitive frameworks), social (isolation, economic precarity, discrimination), cultural (loss of traditional meaning systems), political (oppressive structures, dismantled safety nets), and historical (intergenerational trauma, colonial legacies). These explanations do not exist in isolation. They are overlapping and intersect with caste, class, gender and queer identities in ways that shape both the experience of suffering and access to care.
