Category: Editorial
Title: Cash transfers alone cannot tackle the Part Two

Cash transfers alone cannot tackle the problem of educated unemployment

China has also been producing more than 10 million graduates each year since 2022, a scale comparable to India. China, like India, is struggling to align graduate skills with an evolving labour market. The situation has worsened due to AI's potential impact on entry-level jobs. Youth unemployment in developed countries is also high, with the United Kingdom at 16.2 per cent and the EU at 15.1 per cent.

Countries are responding in different ways to this generation of "would-be workers." China introduced policy measures in 2025, including subsidies to employers hiring college graduates and unemployed youth, and expansion of vocational training programmes to improve the employability of youth. India, too, is expanding and upgrading vocational training with programmes like PM-SETU and introducing new policy instruments, like the Pradhan Mantri Viksit Bharat Rozgar Yojana, which promotes formal job creation and provides a cash benefit of Rs 15,000 to first-time employees, and an employer incentive through monthly cash payouts of up to Rs 3,000 for every new employee. However, unconditional cash transfers to unemployed youth are not the prevailing policy response internationally.

It seems to have taken root in a political economy context where cash transfers have become a popular welfare instrument in the country, and an essential electoral tool, despite government surveys raising concerns about fiscal sustainability. The expansion of cash transfers has also raised concerns about trade-offs with other development priorities like education and health. A fiscally constrained state like Jharkhand spends around half of its social welfare budget on unconditional cash transfers alone.

This year's Economic Survey also flagged the longer-term effects of unconditional transfers on incentives for self-improvement, upskilling and employability. While the Survey focuses on transfers targeting women, the question is even more relevant to the emerging use of cash transfers for unemployed youth: Can they disincentivise job search and lengthen unemployment spells? As many of these programmes are still new and have been introduced without rigorous evaluation or monitoring, it is difficult to know their impact.

Administratively, cash transfers are easier to execute than creating jobs. The question is, what is the policy purpose of providing unconditional cash transfers to unemployed youth? If the objective is to provide a temporary income bridge while they search for work, or enable them to invest in skills and improve their employability, then these programmes can be considered valid short-term labour market interventions, rather than substitutes for job creation.

Written by: Sunaina Kumar The writer is director and senior fellow, Centre for New Economic Diplomacy, Observer Research Foundation
