Category: Editorial
Title: Cash transfers alone cannot tackle the Part One

Cash transfers alone cannot tackle the problem of educated unemployment

Tackle the problem of educated unemployment If the objective is to provide a temporary income bridge while they search for work, or enable them to invest in skills and improve their employability, then these programmes can be considered valid short-term labour market interventions, rather than substitutes for job creation India may be the only country in the world to respond to the challenge of educated unemployment among the youth through state-level cash transfers. At least 10 state governments have introduced such programmes, which shows how the youth, along with women and farmers, have emerged as the most critical political constituency in India. Not surprisingly, nearly all programmes were rolled out around the time of state assembly elections.

The programmes vary considerably in their eligibility; some are explicitly targeted at graduates, like Karnataka, Rajasthan, and Assam. The cash transfers are meant to provide a temporary income bridge for young jobseekers as they search for employment. Some states provide income support to a broader base of educated youth, like Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, and Kerala, which have programmes for those who have completed secondary or higher-secondary education and above, though the amounts for graduates are higher.

Tamil Nadu, which has one of the oldest-running programmes for unemployed youth alongside Kerala, has announced an ambitious upgrade for unemployed graduates under the new TVK government. The conditionalities also vary. A graduate in Karnataka under the age of 35 is eligible for a monthly allowance of Rs 3,000 for a period of two years under Yuva Nidhi, along with access to skill-based training.

Rajasthan's Yuva Sambal combines cash with skill training and a mandatory internship in a government department. Kerala's Connect to Work links assistance of Rs 1,000 per month for one year to mandatory skill training or preparation for competitive examinations. These conditionalities bring the programmes closer to active labour market policies, combining income support with training and work experience to improve employability, though their effectiveness is not clear.

So far, the evidence from states like Karnataka suggests that uptake for skilling and training has been slow. Underlying these programmes is the implicit recognition that the transition from education to employment has become more prolonged and uncertain. Less than 7 per cent of male Indian graduates manage to find a permanent salaried job within a year, according to the State of Working India report (2026), and the Economic Survey points out that only 8.25 per cent of graduates are employed in roles aligned with their qualifications.

Graduate unemployment in India has taken on the contours of a "wicked problem". The graduate unemployment rate in India at 29.1 per cent is nine times higher than for those who cannot read or write, according to a 2024 report by the International Labour Organisation. This is largely attributed to queuing behaviour, as educated youth delay accepting low-paying or informal work while they wait for jobs that match their qualifications and aspirations.

At the same time, the economy is unable to generate enough formal, quality jobs to absorb the growing educated workforce. India is not the only country to have a glut of unemployed graduates and youth. China is a useful comparison in terms of population size. Its youth unemployment rate was 17.9 per cent in July 2026 among 16-24-year-olds excluding students.
