Category: Editorial
Title: Celebrating a sage king a celebration of Part Two

Celebrating a sage king, a celebration of India-Bhutan ties

The Punatsangchhu II project, like many of its predecessors, was constructed as a cooperative venture between the Government of India and the Royal Government of Bhutan, with India providing the initial capital for it  -  this is paid off by the project from the income stream generated by the sale of electricity to India at rates which are competitive but adjusted every few years to reflect current realities. This model has worked well till now but it has been decided that in future, the two countries must tap other sources of capital for such hydropower projects. Now that private capital is readily available in adequate quantity, future projects are to be done by private firms of India in collaboration with Bhutanese companies.

Significantly, Tata Power and Adani Power have readily taken up a few of the projects on offer in Bhutan. India continues to provide development assistance to Bhutan beyond hydropower whether it is for community development projects or larger schemes that range from infrastructure development to upgrading older institutions and even monasteries. Issues of national security K5 continues to seek his father's  -  K4's  -  advice on matters of national security.

Whether it pertains to the territorial integrity of Bhutan or to the operational readiness of the Royal Bhutan Army (RBA), K4 is always consulted by his son. K4 has a deep understanding of not merely India and how its democracy functions but also about Communist China, what motivates and drives that nation and the implications it has for Bhutan-China relations. India will always be grateful to K4 for having personally led Operation All Clear in December 2003 where the RBA drove out several hundred cadres of Indian insurgent groups that had taken shelter in the jungles of Bhutan just across Assam and West Bengal.

On India's side of the border, the Indian Army was able to easily arrest these Indian insurgent groups and proceed against them as in the law. Thus, November 11 is not merely the birthday celebration of a sage and wise former King of Bhutan. Mr. Modi's presence at these events in Thimphu also makes it a celebration of India-Bhutan friendship and cooperation.

Gautam Bambawale is a former Indian Ambassador to Bhutan and is currently Trustee of the Pune International Centre
