Category: Editorial
Title: Celebrating a sage king a celebration of Part One

Celebrating a sage king, a celebration of India-Bhutan ties

India-Bhutan ties Jigme Singye Wangchuck, who turns 70 today, has helped nurture both the modernisation of the mountain kingdom and its relations with India (A file photograph of King Jigme Singye Wangchuck at a lunch meet with his people after describing the benefits of a plan) The former King of Bhutan, Jigme Singye Wangchuck, turns 70 on November 11, 2025. The father of the current King of Bhutan is popularly known as K4 (the fourth King of the Wangchuck line), while his son Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, who sits on the throne at present, is referred to as K5. Jigme Singye Wangchuk is held in great esteem, awe, pride and reverence by his people who often call him the Bodhisattva King.

He ruled Bhutan from the age of 17 years till he abdicated in 2006 in favour of his son. He is revered almost like a Buddha because he ruled wisely, honestly and literally dragged Bhutan into the 21st century, modernising it in many ways. Now, to mark his 70th birth anniversary, there is a huge celebration in Thimphu on November 11, for which Prime Minister Narendra Modi is visiting India's mountainous neighbour.

Two nations, their close ties Mr. Modi has always given much importance to India's relationship with Bhutan. In 2014, on being elected Prime Minister, he had not merely spoken about Neighbourhood First but had also made Bhutan the first foreign country he visited. Now too, Mr. Modi realises the tremendous significance that the birthday celebrations has for the people of Bhutan and is ensuring that he is with them in this time of joy.

His visit is an apt signal of how close the people of India are to the people of Bhutan. It was K4 who further strengthened Bhutan's relationship with India, during his reign as king, exhibiting great understanding that independent India was a close friend of his nation for which all threats to its independence, sovereignty or way of life came from its north and not from the other direction. It was Jigme Singye Wangchuck who got India's Border Roads Organisation to build, operate and maintain the road network of his country.

Today, Bhutanese firms are capable of doing this on their own and have rightly been tasked with this. Again, it was Jigme Singye Wangchuck who saw the potential of generating electricity from Bhutan's rivers and supplying it to India, thereby enabling a steady revenue stream for his nation, which in turn has lifted incomes there. Hydropower diplomacy Hydropower cooperation between India and Bhutan has, over the years, developed into one of the strongest and most significant pillars of the relationship between the two countries.

Therefore, it is apt, symbolic of this friendship and significant in itself, that the Punatsangchhu II hydroelectric project will be formally inaugurated by Mr. Modi and K5 during the trip. The 1,020 MW project has been generating electricity for some months now, helping Bhutan in further raising its economic profile.
