Category: Editorial
Title: Charting an agenda on the right to health Part One

Charting an agenda on the right to health

The National Convention on Health Rights will offer a platform to address India's major health challenges Timed between Human Rights Day (December 10) and Universal Health Coverage Day (December 12), a significant national gathering on public health is being convened in New Delhi. The National Convention on Health Rights (December 11-12, 2025), will offer a unique platform for around 400 health professionals, community leaders and health activists to address India's major health challenges, while charting an agenda on the right to health. Organised by Jan Swasthya Abhiyan (People's Health Movement - India) which comprises diverse networks and civil society organisations from over 20 States, the convention will draw lessons from the COVID-19 crisis, while strengthening right to health initiatives and presenting alternatives to the commercialisation of health care.

Challenging privatisation A major issue is the push for privatisation of public health services. Expansion of public - private partnerships is leading to medical colleges and health facilities being handed over to private players across India. This threatens to dismantle already weakened public services, while making health care unaffordable for crores of Indians who rely on public health-care provisioning.

Leaders from movements against privatisation in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Mumbai, Madhya Pradesh and tribal districts of Gujarat will share insights and strategies, while critiquing the impacts of privatisation on health systems. Commercial private health care in India has rapidly expanded, fuelled by domestic and foreign investments and pro-corporate policies. But this boom has not been matched by necessary regulation.

Much after the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act was enacted in 2010, its implementation remains nominal. The consequences for patients include frequent overcharging and unnecessary medical procedures such as caesarean sections, opaque pricing and violations of patient rights. The convention will advocate for effective implementation of regulatory frameworks including rate standardisation, transparent pricing, mandatory observance of the Charter of Patient's Rights, and accessible grievance redress systems.

India has among the lowest financial allocations for public health globally, with just 2% of the Union Budget allocated for health services, and annual per capita public spending at only $25. Out-of-pocket expenses remain high, despite disproportionate attention to government-supported health insurance schemes. At the convention, participants will examine the gap between claims and ground realities of these schemes and explore alternative financing frameworks centred on enhanced government spending, reduced out-of-pocket costs, and equitable access.

Justice for health workers The COVID-19 pandemic underscored the indispensable roles of frontline doctors, nurses, paramedics and support staff. Yet, many still face low wages, insecure employment, and inadequate social security and working conditions. During this convention, health worker associations will highlight the need for justice to health workers and resilient health systems.

Medicines constitute up to half of a household's medical spending, yet more than 80% of medicines in India remain outside price control. Irrational drug combinations, unethical marketing and high retail markups persist. The convention's session on access to medicines will examine regulatory gaps, pricing barriers, proposed removal of GST on medicines, and expanding public sector production of essential medicines.

The convention is to advocate for public health systems that are capable of delivering universal, quality services. With over 80 crore people in India dependent on public provisioning, strong public health services remain essential. Participants will highlight community-led models and successful state-level initiatives for revitalising public systems, with decentralised planning and community engagement.
