Category: Editorial
Title: Chiles lesson for Indias coal conundrum Part Two

Chile's lesson for India's coal conundrum

TERI has suggested that India could phase out coal power entirely by 2050 to meet its net zero goals. In the transition to this target, there could be an incremental scaling down of coal, improved efficiency and decommissioning. Three sets of action aid this central thrust of a coal phaseout. First, the more the limitations of renewables are tackled, the better for the moving out of coal.

The effort would also be aided by a drive to electrify transport, industry and households. Second, underpinning this physical transition would be the reform of markets and regulation to disincentivise coal, for example through carbon pricing, removal of coal subsidies, clean dispatch rules and power procurement contracts that favour renewables. Third, Chile's experience also speaks to providing robust support for workers through reskilling and alternative livelihoods.

A dedicated transition fund is essential, such as the "Green Energy Transition India Fund" proposed by the Inter-Ministerial Committee. The issue of finance Financing the transition will benefit from a blended model of public and private capital, where government support is directed toward community welfare and workforce reskilling, while private investors lead the expansion of clean energy infrastructure. The District Mineral Foundation corpus can be strategically used to foster entrepreneurship and economic diversification in coal-dependent regions.

Considering the high stakes, a phaseout of coal needs to become a top political priority. Renewable energy gains show tremendous promise, but without an actionable plan to replace coal, climate ambitions would remain hollow. The time has come for a coal exit road map, one that enshrines delivery timelines, financing of social protection, market reform, and learning from peers such as Chile.

Mansi Dhingra is former Consultant, Asian Development Bank. Vinod Thomas is Distinguished Fellow, Asian Institute of Management
