Category: Editorial
Title: Chinas role in the international order Part Two

China's role in the international order

All five permanent members of the UNSC shoulder great responsibility to maintain world peace, uphold the post-WWII world order, and work to make the global governance system more just and equitable. This requires joint efforts in fighting militarism and fascism. Trade as necessary for peace Economic and trade cooperation was also a priority of the leaders' visits.

While dwelling on deepening economic ties with each of the four countries, President Xi underlined mutual trust as the foundation for steady and sustainable state-to-state relations. In our globalised world, the industrial and supply chains of countries are deeply interconnected, and exchanges and cooperation between China and other economies are mutually beneficial in nature. In order to build an inclusive economic globalisation that benefits everybody, countries should share responsibilities together, coordinate actions, and work together to make global economic governance fairer, more just and equitable.

Joint efforts should be made to address the global industrial restructuring. As China kicks off its 15th five-year plan, the country will remain a key contributor to economic growth, open its doors wider and share opportunities with the rest of the world. No matter how developed China becomes, it will never be a threat to other countries.

While a few voices in the media have expressed concerns that such chemistry would squeeze the room for India's role in the international arena, such worries are ill-grounded. China and India are both large economies with strategic autonomy. Both countries should focus on the goals of national development and revitalisation, and seek common understanding and shelf differences.

Efforts should be made to deepen the friendship between our two peoples, and strengthen exchanges in education, culture, tourism, etc. Qin Jie is Consul General of the People's Republic of China in Mumbai.
