Category: Editorial
Title: Cleaner water Part One

Cleaner water

Universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2030 is the norm under UN Sustainable Development Goal 6. Universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2030 is the norm under UN Sustainable Development Goal 6. According to the Falkenmark Water Stressed Indicator, India is among 31 countries facing a water-stressed situation which is projected to worsen by 2050.

Due to hydrological, topographic and other constraints, the utilizable water in India is expected to be 1123 bcm (690 bcm surface water and 433 bcm groundwater). India has 4 per cent of the world's water resources and its water quality ranks 120 out of 122 countries. About 70 per cent of water in India is contaminated.

The use of groundwater is about 64 per cent in irrigation, about 85 per cent in rural water supply, and about 50 per cent in urban water consumption. Groundwater is replenished annually, but its availability is uneven across different locations at times. Surface water and groundwater are showing deteriorating water quality in India, which impair life of living beings, the economy, livelihoods and the health of ecosystems.

Drinking water resources are highly impacted. Over-extraction of groundwater, poor sanitation practices, disposal of industrial effluents, change in land use, waste disposal practices etc., badly affect water quality. For example, nitrate and pesticides get into aquifers, lakes and rivers, which are an important link in the marine food chains.

The main reason for increase of soil salinization is the ingress of saline water into coastal aquifers due to over pumping. Poor disposal of medical waste and indiscriminate antibiotic use lead to micro environments in the aquifers, sewage, and surface water bodies. More than 350 districts in India have fluoride-affected pockets and 150 districts have high arsenic affected areas.

The groundwater contaminants are of two types: anthropogenic and geogenic (natural sources). The former originates from agricultural practices (e.g. nitrogen compound), industrial waste (e.g. lead and chromium), urbanization (e.g. pathogens and toxins entering the aquifer), over-extraction (resulting in salt water intrusion), etc.

The geogenic contamination arises due to certain geological formations naturally dissolving unwanted contaminants such as arsenic, fluoride, uranium, iron etc. into the groundwater. Major contaminants in groundwater are, inter alia, Nitrate, Fluoride, and EC (Electrical conductivity). Nitrate contaminants (anthropogenic) demonstrated the highest frequency of permissible limits (45 mg/litre) in approximately 20.7 per cent of testing samples (CGWB 2025).

This contamination in groundwater comes from agricultural practices and improper waste disposal. Exposure to high levels of contaminants poses severe health risks such as thyroid disorders. Infants are vulnerable as high nitrate in drinking water impairs the blood's ability to carry oxygen causing skin infections and asphyxiation.

Prolonged exposure to nitrate-contaminated groundwater in adults is linked to increased risk of stomach cancer and diabetes. Estimates show that children face up to 1.5 times the chronic health risk compared to adults. Boiling water does not remove nitrates, and it actually concentrates them. Effective filtration methods such as ion exchange and distillation have a positive impact.

Elevated fluoride concentrations (exceeding 1.5 mg/liter), were observed in 8.05 per cent samples (CGWB 2025). This contamination is predominantly geogenic (naturally occurring) associated with water-rock interaction in crystalline and hard rock aquifers such as granites. Fluoride contamination of groundwater and its consumption pose several public health risks, causing dental and skeletal fluorosis.

Effective remediation requires targeted water treatment and watershed management. In India, a sizable part of the population is at risk with hotspots in Rajasthan, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and eastern Karnataka. To avoid this contamination, tapping into deeper uncontaminated aquifers should be adopted.
