Category: Editorial
Title: Climate risks must prompt international Part One

Climate risks must prompt international legal reforms

Climate change may drive a renegotiation of key international law principles, including statehood territory and maritime zones So far, states have focused on addressing climate change's biophysical impacts and finding burden-sharing formulae that avoid serious socio-economic harm to developing and least-developed countries. The grave consequences of climate change are likely to prompt a renegotiation of some of the fundamentals of international law, including permanent sovereignty over natural resources (PSNR), requirement of territory for statehood, and unsettling of maritime zones. The principle of PSNR is a fundamental right of states and peoples, which represents the resolve of developing countries to attain economic independence.

Under the PSNR, a state has the right to extract fossil fuels above and below ground. The urgency to restrict global average temperature below 1.5° Celsius is giving rise to the demand among many states, scholars and policymakers to phase out fossil fuel. Scholarly writings increasingly support a Fossil-Fuel Non-Proliferation Treaty to keep large swathes of fossil fuels that remain in the ground The issue of fossil fuels, first raised at COP 28 and again at COP 30  -  even outside the formal agenda  -  highlights growing momentum for a phase-out.

The developing countries may accept limited obligations impinging on PSNR towards a common concern of mankind but these must not be permanent or disregard the interests of high fossil-fuel-dependent nations. The limited obligations should be accompanied by developed countries providing sufficient finance and transferring carbon-neutral 'best available technologies' to developing nations Climate change and territory International law specifies that territory is a necessary prerequisite for statehood. The 1933 Montevideo Convention in Uruguay established the four criteria of statehood  -  territory, permanent population, government, and the capacity to enter into relations with another state  -  as the benchmark for state recognition.

Sea-level rise (SLR) threatening small island states poses the question of their continued statehood. Although the presumption of state continuity is unquestionably part of customary international law, several states are not categorical about its application to SLR. The International Court of Justice, in its advisory opinion, has said that once a state is established, the disappearance of one of its constituent elements would not necessarily entail the loss of its statehood.

Scholars have described the ICJ's opinion on this aspect as a very modest legal claim. In 2023, the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) declared that international law does not contemplate its demise in the context of climate change-related SLR. Even the Montevideo Convention does not mention how much territory is to be lost to lose statehood.

James Crawford, an authority on creation of state, is of the view that while a state must possess territory, there is no rule specifying a minimum size. Despite these arguments and legal claims, statehood generally remains precarious and often borderline. The unprecedented risks to be faced by small-island states must prompt the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to use the forum of the Conference of the Parties (COP) to apply equitable principles, addressing gaps in existing law beyond strict legal rules Climate change-induced migration In international law, the status of people who are likely to move to another country in the context of SLR is unclear.
