Category: Editorial
Title: Climate change driving more local Part Two

Climate change driving more local extinctions in temperate species than tropical ones, study finds

"We found evidence supporting two hypotheses to explain why local extinction is more frequent in temperate than tropical species," the authors observed. "First, terrestrial temperate species have a slightly higher frequency of extinction for the same level of large-scale climatic warming than tropical species. Second, there was greater warming at high latitudes, with greater warming leading to more frequent local extinction in all three habitats." Why tropical species may differ One possible reason temperate species are more sensitive to temperature change is that mid-and high-latitude species may have lower physiological thermal-safety margins.

Thermal-safety margins refer to the difference between the temperature limits an organism can tolerate and the extreme temperatures it experiences in its environment. The researchers said temperate species may also be more vulnerable because of increased summer heat stress, which can reduce fitness, even if longer growing seasons and warmer winters benefit some species. Gopal Murali, an evolutionary ecologist at the Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, and lead author of the study, said climate-linked local extinctions across species' ranges were observed only in temperate species.

For tropical species, extinctions were more concentrated at the warm edge of their ranges. "One possible explanation is the difference in temperature gradients across elevational ranges," Murali said. "Tropical mountains offer a greater variety of temperatures over relatively short distances in elevation.

This means that when conditions become too warm at lower elevations, populations higher up the mountain may still find suitable conditions. As a result, extinctions tend to be concentrated at the warm edge," he added. In contrast, Murali said, suitable temperatures may be harder to find elsewhere within the ranges of many temperate species because temperatures do not change as sharply with elevation as they do in the tropics.

As a result, warming can affect populations across much of the range, not just those at the warm edge, he said. Range shifts not enough The study also examined whether species were expanding into cooler areas as their existing habitats warmed. Murali said about 29 per cent of all species in the dataset showed cool-edge dispersal, meaning they had expanded their ranges into cooler regions.

Among tropical species, the figure was 24 per cent. But such movements were not enough to offset local losses, Murali said. "One important distinction is that many previous studies quantified the rate of range shifts, whereas our analysis simply asked whether species had expanded into cooler regions or not," he said.

"The key finding is that these expansions were not common enough to offset local extinctions. While some species are successfully tracking changing climates, many are losing populations faster than they are gaining new ones." Murali said several barriers could be preventing species from moving fast enough. Suitable habitat may not be available in cooler areas.

"Some species may be unable to disperse to those areas (new regions), while others may have nowhere suitable to go," he said. In many cases, climate change may simply be happening too quickly for populations to keep pace. By Himanshu Nitnaware
