Category: Editorial
Title: COP Thirty must address the most vulnerable

COP 30 must address the most vulnerable

One of the priorities at COP 30 will be to create a roadmap to track global adaptation progress. Unlike mitigation, adaptation has no single global metric. The roadmap will also need to be sensitive to the fact that social inequalities make some people more vulnerable than others. The UNFCCC's 30th Conference of Parties (COP 30) that begins in Belem, Brazil, on November 10 will mark a decade since the Paris Climate Pact came into force.

A lot has changed since the landmark treaty was adopted, and at the same time, the needle hasn't moved much on several longstanding climate issues. Renewables have edged out fossil fuels as the biggest source of energy. Yet, there has scarcely been a slowdown in the trajectory of global greenhouse gas emissions.

Policies now in place are expected to shave off warming by 2100 by nearly one full degree  -  from 3.6 degrees Celsius pre-Paris to around 2.7 degrees Celsius. That's still way short of the 1.5 degrees Celsius threshold set in Paris. In the run-up to COP 30, more than 60 countries have submitted revised climate action plans.

Many more, including India, are expected to do so at Belem. However, by all accounts, collective ambition will not be enough to keep global warming below the threshold set at Paris. The large deficits in global-warming mitigation mean that countries have to invest more in shielding people from extreme weather events.

The spiralling effects of climate change are already evident in the record-breaking heatwaves of 2024, the toll taken by floods, typhoons and cyclones over the past 10 years, and the forest fires that have raged in different parts of the world in the last three years. According to a World Meteorological Organisation Report, released in October, "millions of people lack the protection against dangerous weather, which is also inflicting a dangerous toll on vital economic assets". The report underlined the importance of investing in early warning systems.

Another analysis of global efforts to make people resilient to climate-change impacts, the UNEP's Adaptation Gap Report 2025 released in the run-up to COP 30, shows that developing countries will need $310 billion annually between now and 2035 to protect people from searing heat, rising seas, rivers in spate and deadly storms  -  this is nearly 12 times the finances currently allocated for adaptation. One of the priorities at COP 30 will be to create a roadmap to track global adaptation progress. Unlike mitigation, adaptation has no single global metric.

The roadmap will also need to be sensitive to the fact that social inequalities make some people more vulnerable than others. In other words, while the Belem meet will need to find ways to scale up climate finances, it will also need to create mechanisms to ensure that the funds reach those who need them the most. The negotiators will have their task cut out in the next fortnight.
