Category: Editorial
Title: Counting on the weather gods Part Two

Counting on the weather gods

So ultimately, all the brouhaha about meeting a new demand high has to be taken with a pinch of salt and it is no reflection of consumer welfare. Having said that, it may be added that it is not only a question of dilapidated infrastructure. There is a drastic fall in generation once the sun goes down, meaning our conventional supply sources  -  like coal, gas, nuclear  -  are struggling to meet the night load.

Uttar Pradesh has complained that power is not available in the exchange either. One is thankful that the peak demand has shifted to solar hours (3.30 pm) against the evening hours (7 pm) as it used to be earlier. The ageing coal-based fleet seems to be the culprit, as there are several outages due to enhanced power demand.

Demand has surged due to excessive heatwave conditions necessitating prolonged use of air-conditioners. This is a matter of concern as we have always boasted that we have more than ample capacity of coal-based generation. There have been statements from the government in the past that no fresh coal-based power stations would be set up.

There has, of course, been a volte-face and the latest position is that ~70-80 Gw of fresh capacity will be created by 2035. The actual realisation, incidentally, is only about 25 Gw in the last five years. If measured against the government's own cumulative targets from 2021-22 to 2025-26, only 44% has been achieved pan-India, and if we measure only the central sector, it is even less at 42%.

To sum up, we seem to be heading for a crisis. Government directives to keep all coal and gas plants running has not been good enough. Our addition to renewable capacity, though substantial, is not enough to replace coal. Our battery back-up is almost negligible, so we can't use solar power during non-solar hours.

Our growth in nuclear capacity is almost meagre and as for hydro, it is almost non-existent. There is no availability of gas in any case, and generation from gas stations is abysmally low. So, for the immediate future, only the weather gods can come to our rescue. Written by Somit Dasgupta The author is Visiting Professor, ICRIER
