Category: Editorial
Title: Counting on the weather gods Part One

Counting on the weather gods

Not all discoms have been able to upgrade infra; brouhaha about meeting high demand is misleading. This piece is concerned with two unrelated issues linked to the power sector. First, a recent study conducted by two premium engineering institutes in India has concluded that the country should install flue gas desulphurisers (FGDs) in all its coal-based power plants.

FGDs are meant to suck out sulphur from the flue gases emitted from power stations. The sulphur in the flue gases adds to particulate matter in the atmosphere and therefore is detrimental to human health. Installation of FGDs has been prescribed even though sulphur content in Indian coal is relatively low.

Ironically, in a different study (2022) conducted by one of the two institutes concerned, it was mentioned that because the sulphur content in Indian coal is low, it makes little sense to install FGDs. In fact, it went a step further. It revealed that in the process of removing sulphur from the flue gases, FGDs are releasing more carbon in the atmosphere, and thus  installation would result in an increase in carbon footprint.

There is no denying that research is an evolving process where a subsequent study may come to a conclusion that is diametrically opposite to a previous one. However, when that happens, it confuses the policymakers regarding the next course of action. The earlier study of 2022 was music to policymakers' ears because India was not making any progress on the installation of FGDs.

There were repeated dilutions to the environmental norms and in the final analysis, the government devised some norms and opined that only about 11% of the power stations need to install FGDs. Though the revised environmental norms were first introduced in 2015, till as late as 2025, only a handful of power stations had installed FGDs. While the actual installation was zero for the state generators, only about 5% of the power stations in the central sector installed FGDs.

The private sector performance was a little better at 13%. There are several reasons for this poor performance. First, when the revised norms were issued in 2015, there was practically no domestic manufacturer of FGDs. Soon, there was a scramble to manufacture these, but the issue of cost and its effect on retail price of electricity came up.

The fixed cost would go up by about 70 paise per unit and there would also be an enhancement of variable cost to the extent of about 4 paise. Additionally, it was a nightmare for regulators since they did not know about the legitimate costs which should be allowed to the developer. Finally, there was also the question of space as many of the older plants did not have space to install FGDs.

While there is apparently no rethinking about installation of FGDs, the current talk is about the galloping demand for power and how to meet it. A new demand high of about 270 gigawatt (Gw) was met recently, but this does not mean that there are no power cuts. The way shortages are estimated is complex, and outages due to dilapidated infrastructure are not taken into account.

Several parts of the country are facing outages which can stretch for a few hours and affluent areas like Gurugram are no exception. This is partly on account of dilapidated distribution infrastructure which can't take the load. Not all discoms in the country have been able to upgrade their infrastructure (like Delhi,  financed through retail tariffs).
