Category: Editorial
Title: Cubas energy crisis deepens amid sanctions Part One

Cuba's energy crisis deepens amid sanctions

Cuba, an island nation that depends heavily on external support for energy, is currently facing an acute energy crisis, with prolonged nationwide blackouts, fuel shortages, and disruptions to daily life, leaving even hospitals struggling to carry out surgeries and pump water. The situation has worsened after Venezuelan oil supplies, long a source of subsidised fuel for Cuba, were disrupted following the January 3, 2026, US intervention in Venezuela that led to the ouster of President Nicolás Maduro and the restructuring of the country's oil sector. This, along with longstanding US sanctions and Cuba's economic challenges, has restricted Cuba's ability to secure alternative supplies and has pushed an already fragile economy into crisis.

The situation has become further complicated by the impact of repeated natural disasters, which place significant stress on the island's already fragile power grid, which lacks the resilience to recover quickly from such disruptions. This is not the first time Cuba has faced such a situation. In 1991, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Cuba lost its main source of subsidised oil and went through a severe economic crisis known as the "Special Period." However, in the 2000s, Venezuela replaced the Soviet Union as Cuba's key energy partner, helping stabilise the situation.

Nonetheless, owing to Venezuela's political and economic crisis since 2014, including plummeting oil production and hyperinflation, this agreement was disrupted, leaving Cuba's energy sector vulnerable. Without sufficient funding or consistent oil imports, Cuba's energy infrastructure has deteriorated, heightening its susceptibility to outages. For the US, the recurring energy crisis is mainly due to Cuba's socialist command economic model.

For them, Cuba's state-controlled system has low productivity, limited investment, and does not generate enough revenue to pay for essential imports such as fuel. In this regard, the loss of Venezuelan oil has simply exposed these underlying weaknesses. The US also points to the growing exodus of Cubans, many of whom seek asylum in the United States, and the rise of black markets as evidence of deep economic distress and systemic failure.

More broadly, the US maintains sanctions not only to exert economic pressure but also with the objective of encouraging changes in Cuba's economic model and, ultimately, its political system as a pathway to reform. In this regard, President Donald Trump has stated that Cuba will collapse on its own, without the need for direct intervention. Echoing this, Secretary of State Marco Rubio said, "they're in a lot of trouble, and the people in charge, they don't know how to fix it, so they have to get new people in charge." Cuba, however, maintains that long-standing US sanctions are a major reason for the energy crisis.

Sanctions limit access to international banking, make it difficult to buy fuel, and discourage other countries from doing business with Cuba. In their view, even if they want to diversify energy sources or improve infrastructure, sanctions make it very hard to do so. Cuba also frames the present crisis as part of a long-standing struggle for survival against imperialist forces by invoking historical episodes such as the 1959 revolution led by Fidel Castro to overthrow the regime of Fulgencio Batista aligned with US interests, and the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961.

By recalling how the country endured US sanctions, authorities reinforce the message that Cuba has withstood such pressure before and will continue to do so. Meanwhile, to come out of the crisis, the Cuban government led by President Miguel Díaz-Canel has taken several steps. These measures include contingency plans that prioritise scheduled power cuts, fuel rationing, and the safeguarding of essential sectors such as healthcare and food distribution.
