Category: Editorial
Title: Cubas energy crisis deepens amid sanctions Part Two

Cuba's energy crisis deepens amid sanctions

Further, the government has also made efforts to stabilise the economy; however, on the other hand, this has placed additional strain on the energy sector. For instance, the "macroeconomic stabilisation programme," launched in late 2022 and formalised in 2024, led to cuts in gasoline subsidies. The resulting rise in fuel prices, combined with ongoing shortages, has placed additional strain on Cuba's key industries, particularly the sugar sector, which plays a central role in generating export revenue needed to finance energy imports.

Also, the removal of subsidies has increased financial pressure on households, forcing many to turn to the black market for fuel. Thus, these measures raise questions about their long-term sustainability. At the international level, Cuba has long advocated within the United Nations General Assembly for the lifting of US sanctions and its removal from the list of State Sponsors of Terrorism (reinstated during the second Trump administration), arguing that these measures hinder economic development and cause significant hardship for its people.

Externally, the government continues to receive limited oil shipments from countries such as Russia and Mexico despite the sanctions. However, these deliveries provide only temporary relief and cannot replace the scale of support previously provided by Venezuela. Moreover, these countries have been sceptical due to Cuba's difficulty in paying debts.

Other than oil shipments, Cuba is also actively receiving international assistance to support its transition to renewable energy, particularly solar power, from countries including India and China. Nevertheless, this remains a long-term process, and sanctions continue to impose significant constraints. Regardless of the debates over whether sanctions or economic policies are the core reasons, one fact remains undeniable: ordinary Cubans suffer the most.

A lasting solution will require sustained dialogue between US and Cuban stakeholders to find common ground, as well as serious internal introspection. Until that happens, the crisis will be less a geopolitical struggle and more an everyday fight for survival for the Cuban people. By Girisanker SB The writer is associated with Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA), New Delhi-based think-tank, specialising in US-Latin America ; views are personal
