Category: Editorial
Title: Dangerous paradigm On Trump Venezuela and Part One

Dangerous paradigm: On Trump, Venezuela and unhinged depredation

Trump has lowered the threshold of norms for conduct on global stage Following the kidnapping and removal to U.S. soil of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro and his wife, on the back of military action not authorised by Congress or supported by the UN, U.S. President Donald Trump has now made clear his intent to set the crosshairs of American neo-imperialist expansionism on other nations and territories including Colombia, Greenland, Mexico, Cuba, and Iran.

The Trump administration surprised the world, and apparently Venezuelan military forces, when it launched an overnight strike on Caracas over the weekend, including likely use of artillery and special forces, to extract the Maduros to face federal drug trafficking and weapons charges  -  charges that Mr. Maduro pleaded not guilty to. Responding to media after the event, Mr.

Trump appeared to be setting his sights on Colombian President Gustavo Petro, when he said that that country was being "run by a sick man who likes making cocaine and selling it to the U.S.," and "He's not going to be doing it for very long." Similarly, Mr. Trump has remarked that the U.S. has a "need" for Greenland from the perspective of its "national security", that "something will have to be done about Mexico" to rid the nation of the scourge of drug cartels, that Cuba is "ready to fall" in the absence of revenue linked to Venezuelan oil, and that Iran would be "hit very hard by the U.S." if it cracked down on protesters on its soil.

While the Trump administration has consistently lowered the threshold of norms and acceptable standards for the conduct of nations on the global stage and diverged from the positions of previous Democrat-and Republican-led governments on the threat posed, for example by Russia to Europe, to directly engage in unauthorised and illegal interference of a brazen kind and seek regime change through the use of force in an established hemispheric power is a new low. The deeper danger of this so called "Donroe Doctrine"  -  ultimately premised on seizing Venezuela's cherished oil resources rather than any pretext of "restoring democracy"  -  is that it may embolden autocrats and nations with an appetite for fomenting conflict to engage in similar destabilising unilateral military action against perceived enemies, potentially resulting in full-fledged cross-border confrontations. Today's Venezuela was yesterday's Ukraine and might be tomorrow's Taiwan, if Mr.

Trump's paradigm for settling scores propagates further. While the leaders of each potential future target of U.S. aggression and the UN leadership have protested such action by Washington, it might take nothing less than the major powers of today, including India, Europe, Australia, Africa and Latin America, speaking in one voice against this unhinged depredation by the Trump administration to halt this dangerous new paradigm in its tracks.

At a crossroads: On Iran's unrest, its re-engagement with the world Iran must initiate reforms and reengage with the world What began as a strike by shopkeepers in Tehran on December 28 against the sharp fall in the value of the Iranian rial, has snowballed into the largest nationwide protest Iran has witnessed since the 2022-2023 unrest triggered by the custodial death of Mahsa Amini. While the government has promised to address the economic grievances of the traders, it has also warned of a harsh response to "rioters". At least 12 people have been killed in the past week with the protests spreading.
