Category: Editorial
Title: Death of winter In Ladakh a fading cold Part Three

Death of winter: In Ladakh, a fading cold season is rewriting life in the high Himalayas

"For instance, woolly apple aphid has begun appearing in apple orchards, and several scale insects are now affecting apricot, peach and cherry crops," she says. She adds that climate change, combined with the absence of natural predators, has enabled these pests to establish and spread more rapidly. Wildlife and ecosystems at risk Experts say the ecological impacts of warmer winters in Ladakh may not be immediately visible, but could become significant over time.

Tsewang Namgail, director of the Snow Leopard Conservancy-India Trust, says cold-adapted species are particularly vulnerable. "The impact of a warmer winter cannot be quantified immediately," he says. "But species such as the snow leopard and the wild yak are adapted to extremely low temperatures, and even slight warming can affect them and lead to physiological stress." Rising temperatures are also driving broader ecological changes.

Warming accelerates glacier melt across the Himalayas, leading to the formation of glacial lakes that may eventually breach and cause flooding in mountain valleys. "Such floods can wash away alpine meadows and vegetation along streams, which are critical grazing habitats for wild ungulates," he says. "This leads to habitat destruction that directly affects wildlife populations." Habitats themselves may begin to shift.

"As the tree line moves upward and the snow line retreats, the habitat of species such as the snow leopard may shrink or change," Namgail says. Research increasingly shows that species are moving upslope in response to rising temperatures. This shift that may also increase human-wildlife conflict, as animals enter areas where they were rarely seen before and damage crops.

Over time, he adds, new habitats may form in flatter areas, "but along water bodies bordered by rocky terrain, where there is little scope for lateral expansion, these habitats could be lost permanently." By Rinchen Angmo Chumikchan
