Category: Editorial
Title: Deceit and intimidation Part One

Deceit and intimidation

US exit from global bodies follows past chicanery, may now give developing world a greater say After withdrawing from the Paris Agreement (PA) for the second time, the US administration recently dissociated itself from 66 international organisations out of which 31 were linked to the United Nations (UN). The organisations from where the US withdrew are involved in a host of activities, which include climate change bodies such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), and also others like the International Solar Alliance, UN Population Fund, UN Conference to Trade and Development, UN Women, etc. The US government opined that the functioning of these organisations was contrary to its interest, and constraining its sovereignty apart from wasting taxpayers' money.

The immediate impact of the US move would be a cutback on jobs. And of course, there are larger issues involved since organisations like the UNFCCC and IPCC are affected. I would like to argue about issues only related to climate change. Before taking a deep dive into the US action, as an eye opener, it would be good to see its role in carbon emissions (see table).

Today, China, the US, and India are the three largest emitters. China is head and shoulders above both - about two and a half times more than the US, and nearly five and a half times more than India. One should, however, add that the US has already peaked its emissions in 2007 (6.12 billion tonnes) and is now on the decline, while China and India are yet to peak.

Of course, these are total emissions and if per capita emissions are estimated, the top honours would go to countries like Qatar, Singapore, Bahrain, and Iceland. In cumulative terms, the US is the highest emitter, responsible for 25% of global emissions. Despite being the highest cumulative emitter, the US has been conceited when it comes to dealing with climate change, almost cocking a snook at the world community.

Though the US played a positive role in setting up the UNFCCC and IPCC, it has always resisted laying down targets for reducing carbon emissions. It never ratified the Kyoto Protocol which had laid down targets for developed nations on the grounds that countries like China and India should also be assigned targets. Of course, the US was not the only country to demand this; similar sentiments were aired by many of the western nations.

The US went a step further by trying to confuse the issue when it said that climate change is actually caused by methane emissions, something that China and India does in plenty on account of paddy farming and cattle rearing (Raghunandan). Though the US will not accept any targets for reduction in carbon footprints for itself, it wanted the steps taken by developing countries to be monitored and reviewed. The US, along with its western allies, sought to dilute the concept of common but differentiated responsibilities, which recognised that the developed countries were responsible for climate change.

After pursuing this end for several years, they finally tasted success in the PA (2015) which stipulated that all countries will formulate their nationally determined contributions (NDCs). It kind of made every country responsible for combating climate change. And, in a way, erased the fact that the developed world was primarily responsible for climate change.
