Category: Editorial
Title: Distressing regularity On Meghalayas rathole

Distressing regularity: On Meghalaya's rat-hole mines

Meghalaya's rat-hole mines Illegal mining should become socially expensive and operationally prohibitive The explosion in an illegal rat-hole mine in Meghalaya on February 5, killing at least 18 workers, is a grim reminder that court supervision cannot substitute governance. Illegal coal mining in India is a long-running problem, but the northeast, especially Meghalaya's coal belt, has a distinct ecosystem  -  of small privately or community-owned landholdings, thin coal seams, weak local enforcement, and supply chains  -  that can launder illegal coal into legitimate markets through intermediaries. Rat-hole mining is the norm (for illegal setups), and they are prone to collapsing because they lack engineered roofs and side-wall protections.

The National Green Tribunal ordered its cessation in 2014, but illegal mines have continued due to a high local dependence on income from coal, fragmented ownership and contractorships that spread accountability and patronage. Operators of illegal mines also underreport accidents and keep workers off formal records; and while workers' deaths hit the headlines, injuries  -  due to polluted water, acid drains, unstable landscapes, and degraded roads  -  and child labour use do not. Illegal coal is currently not easy to separate from legacy or auctioned coal once it has entered the supply chain.

But the expected cost of illegal extraction and transport needs to go up. Meghalaya already has a framework to prevent illegal mining, transport, and storage under the MMDR Act. Using technology to reduce the cost of detection, it should add mandatory GPS tracking for all coal carriers, invalidate consignments that deviate from a specific route, and integrate satellite and drone patrol data with control rooms.

Illegal mining should also become socially expensive, perhaps through community monitoring, incentivised by sharing penalties with local bodies. Conversely, the State should pressure intermediaries with seizure, cancelled licences, prosecution, and blacklisting from auctions. Next, bans fail sans alternatives, so the State should displace illegal mining as an income source by setting up credit and market linkages for horticulture, construction, small manufacturing and tourism, and refitting public works to absorb mining labour.

Finally, the State must dismantle incentives on the supply side; the February 5 blast shows that illegal mines continue to access an informal labour market. To this end, the State may allow workers to testify in exchange for amnesty, and aggressively pursue errant contractors. It should also subvert the administrative tolerance for such contractors by rotating postings in hotspot districts and independently auditing permits, among others.

Treating rat-hole mining as an enforcement issue alone risks pushing the practice further underground.
