Category: Editorial
Title: Dollar rule Powered by money or muscle Part One

Dollar rule: Powered by money or muscle?

The dollar achieving reserve currency status is as much to do with US' military might as it is with the size of its economy There are only three weeks left in this 25th year of the 21st century. And as this first quarter comes to an end, everyone is talking about the end of the old world order.

No one, however, knows what the new one will look like. The president of Finland recently wrote in Foreign Affairs that, in order to see the outline of the new order, we must distinguish between multilateralism and multipolarity. Multilateralism, he said, was a rule-based thing. We have had it till now.

Multipolarity is simply a duopoly in which two powers decide and others must follow. An important element of any world order, multipolar or multilateral, is the currency that all countries accept as a medium of exchange and store of value. Currently it is the dollar. against which the rupee has crossed ₹90.

During a private discussion on this someone asked if things would be different if the dollar wasn't the capo di tutti capo (captain of all captains) of all currencies. Many others have had the same thought, especially after the weaponisation of the dollar by America via financial sanctions. This bullying has forced countries to think about alternative currencies for settling international trade payments and debt, not to mention hiding ill-gotten gains.

The world believes that the dollar is dominant because the American economy is so huge. That is true but there is another aspect that needs discussion: Is it military might or economic size that makes the eventual difference? Or as economists might ask, what are the necessary and sufficient conditions to make a currency the reserve currency of the world?

Will the dollar still be it in 2050? Reserve currency history The world didn't have what we now call a 'reserve currency' till about the end of the 19th century. What it had was gold and silver which were the underlying assets of any currency. That arrangement ended in August 1971 when the US went off the gold standard.

That should have ended dollar dominance but, instead, the dollar became even more dominant. Far from telling America we don't trust you, all countries told it the opposite, we trust only you. This is a huge paradox which no one has tried to solve. Or, those who have, have explained it in terms of the sheer size of the American economy.

That was an important reason, of course, but was it the only reason? Would this have happened if, like Japan or Germany, the US had not been so militaristic? In 2001 it had bases in 103 countries. That number is down to 84 or 85 today. In contrast China has none. The British army and navy inspired much needed trust amongst business people that contracts would be enforced, one way or another.

It was a different matter that most such contracts favoured British businesses and the law being followed was British law. It was Pax Brittanica, or as the Chinese might say, multilateralism with multipolar characteristics. So we should stop fooling ourselves about the strength of a currency being solely the function of its economy's size.

The evolution of the sterling as the global currency was backed by England's navy and army. The Germans started to challenge it at the start of the 20th century but got absolutely nowhere. But they did plant the seed of dollar dominance. By 1918 the entire gold of Europe had been shipped to the US. That's why Fort Knox was built.
