Category: Editorial
Title: Dollar dynamics Part One

Dollar dynamics

US currency is set to fall in 2026 amidst volatility As Trump is having more and more angry fun, the world is getting more and more nervous. De-dollarization stories abound, as do concerns of US yields soaring triggering an equity collapse. Of course, equity markets generally only collapse when no one is looking, but bond markets are another story.

And the dollar, of course, is its own animal. There's no gainsaying that the dollar is still the big daddy in global markets, but it has been losing credibility steadily, even before the US sanctions on Russia, when it invaded Ukraine, accelerated the trend. Now, concern about the dollar is everywhere  -  you can't turn around without bumping into someone with reasonable credentials explaining that Trump attacked Venezuela because they were selling oil in yuan, or that Brazil has started using the BRICS bridge in earnest as a route for quick safe intra-BRICS transactions by-passing the dollar, or that gold and cryptocurrencies are the new safe haven, or that soon enough large holders will begin to start dumping US Treasuries, or...

You get the drift. The world is becoming more multi-polar and the dollar is in everyone's sights. But it's still a long way to that particular bank. The dollar continues to hold the highest share in global reserves (57.4 per cent), even though it has been steadily but slowly declining. Dollar domination It also currently has a similar share of global trade invoicing; however, that number is likely to fall quite rapidly  -  already 80-90 per cent of Russia's trade is (unsurprisingly) not conducted in dollars, and as much as 30 per cent of China's trade is settled in yuan and is rising fast.

Of course, well over 85 per cent of foreign exchange transactions have the dollar as one leg (since investment flows are still primarily in dollars), but there is little doubt that there is a significant change infesting the global currency environment. Separately, the value of the dollar could  -  and should  -  begin to fall, and, perhaps, sharply. It has already (in 2025) fallen quite steeply, losing nearly 12 per cent against the Euro and other currencies in Europe and in Latin America; and to a lesser extent in Asia.

It only gained against 8 currencies monitored by The Economist, including basket cases like Turkey and Argentina (and, sadly, the rupee). With Trump's increasing belligerence, it is a virtual certainty that the diversification out of the dollar will continue, although, as I said earlier, to a limit. Nonetheless, this will serve to reduce several fundamental imbalances.

Recent data shows that the US makes up close to 50 per cent of global stock market value, while its share of global GDP is roughly 25 per cent; thus, US equities are valued at roughly twice its share of world economic output. Of course, these numbers are denominated in USD, so if  -  or, I should say, when  -  the dollar starts to fall again, this ratio will automatically come down. US equities expensive Again, it is widely acknowledged that the US has become extremely expensive relative to most other countries; and, again, that is also largely the result of an overvalued dollar.
