Category: Editorial
Title: Dont count faith to kill a college lot at

Don't count faith to kill a college, lot at stake

The latest NMC decision unabashedly short-circuited due process - there was no show-cause notice to the college, no room for appeals. A medical college in Katra that got the National Medical Commission's green signal to run an MBBS course just four months ago is now asked to shut it down, four days after an inspection conducted in haste. The latest NMC decision unabashedly short-circuited due process - there was no show-cause notice to the college, no room for appeals.

The volte-face tells a dismal story of prejudice and intolerance  -  and the pandering to it  -  in defiance of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to equality and protects against discrimination. While the NMC justifies its action by pointing to a shortage of tutors, library resources and lecture theatres, it is clear that the real reason lies elsewhere. The Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Institute of Medical Excellence (SMVDIME) had become the staging ground for protests ever since 44 of the first batch of 50 students in its MBBS course turned out to be Muslim.

This was the result of a national exam administered fairly and freely. But for a group of nearly 60 pro-RSS and pro-BJP organisations, this wasn't the result they wanted  -  these groups argue the college was set up with donations to the Vaishno Devi shrine by Hindu pilgrims from across the country. And this should reflect in the faith of the incoming class.

That these groups should ask for the ouster of students of a particular religion from the classroom, and that the statutory regulatory body for medical education and practice in the country should take heed of their perverse demand and discontinue the course entirely, is enormously disturbing. The cost of the NMC's cave-in will be borne by the students, of course, and by the faculty at SMVDIME. But there is a greater price to be paid.

Ever since the abrogation of Article 370 in August 2019, the BJP-led government at the Centre has spoken of a "Naya Kashmir", more intimately integrated with the larger India story, and less weighed down by its turbulent history. In their speeches, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah have underlined that promise. The NMC decision poses a question mark against those assurances.

It threatens to stoke distrust among the people of Kashmir. The institution needs to knock on the court's door before more damage is done. The NMC needs to read the Constitution. It makes space for the establishment of minority educational institutions to preserve a language or religion, but for the rest, there can be no headcount, no discrimination and no exclusions, in the classroom.

To scatter these students in other colleges is a violation of their rights -  you cannot be equal if you are kept separate. What is happening in the Katra college goes against the constitutional letter and spirit, it's a stain not only on the idea of "Naya Kashmir" but also on that of the nation. The sooner it is reversed, the better.
