Category: Editorial
Title: Ease the burden of GST compliance Part Two

Ease the burden of GST compliance

The balance swells over a period of time, blocking working capital to a great extent. The ITC balance in the books of businesses results in a higher requirement for working capital in the initial years of accumulation and then results in increased costs as such balances are then written off. Being an indirect tax, GST levied on consumption cannot be a part of the cost of doing business and hence complete neutrality is necessary for cost optimisation.

The solution lies in having a single GSTIN applicable across the country. With the advent of digital enhancements/automation in GST processes and adoption of advanced technologies by the GSTN, the time is opportune to unleash this long-pending reform. In the back end, the GSTN can apportion the share of the consumption state.

This one change can bring a huge relief for businesses. In the erstwhile service tax regime, a single pan-India registration was valid throughout the country; the same can be implemented now. This will also pave the way for a unified approach to GST audits and assessments where either the central or state GST authorities can take up the mandate, thereby easing the entire process.

Fourth, address the issue of blocked credits unrelated to personal consumption by completely eliminating them and providing for ITC on all supplies with a small negative list. Since the rationalisation of rates in September 2025, inverted duty structures have led to huge refunds for many taxpayers. An automatic refund route needs to be provided, as is the case for refund to exporters  -  that too for GST paid on inputs, input services, and capital goods.

Currently, the refunds on account of inverted duty structure are limited to GST paid on inputs. If India truly aspires to become a global manufacturing hub, its GST must function as a genuine value-added tax as is evident in more than 140 countries. It is very surprising fact that a tax which works wonders in other countries becomes quite complex in India.

A flawless GST structure can be achieved only if the excluded sectors are gradually brought into the GST base and a time-bound refund mechanism supported by full digitisation is rolled out. Restoring ITC neutrality would reduce manufacturing costs, improve compliance, and strengthen export competitiveness. The next phase of GST reform must therefore focus not only on the rates but also on restoring the integrity of the ITC chain, a seamless ITC mechanism, and easing the burden of compliance for taxpayers.

By Rahul Renavikar, Managing Director, Acuris Advisors Pvt. Ltd
