Category: Editorial
Title: Easing gig workers stress

Easing gig workers' stress

Creating more transparent algorithms is key This new year has seen multiple online debates about the Indian gig economy -  on wages, social security, working hours, ID blocking and others. The topic that garnered the most attention was on "10-minute deliveries". Some argued that the deadline pressure puts workers at risk.

Platform companies claimed the gig workers could deliver so fast because of the density of dark stores and efficiency of their packing processes. Even the Central government stepped into the debate, telling quick commerce firms to stop advertising this feature, citing worker safety. Does this solve the problem of adverse impacts on the workers?

Sadly, no. The 10 minutes may become 20- minutes, but the worker pressures will not go away. It is like taking Crocin for a fever, without addressing the underlying illness or spraying water to reduce pollution and not tackling the source.. There are fundamental issues with the design of the platform-based gig economy.

And opaque algorithms are at the heart of it. Work allocation, earnings, ID termination, grievance redressal, and worker ratings are all controlled by algorithms. But how these algorithms work is not always clear. Our report, 'The Algorithmic Human Manager: AI, Apps, and Workers in the Indian Gig Economy', analyses this matter in detail.

Two key issues Let us first examine two of these issues. Issue 1: Design/dark patterns for gig work: There exist some design and dark-patterns in gig-worker apps that result in increased stress on the workers. Patterns such as algorithmic opacity, excessive monitoring of workers without consent, wage concealment (i.e., not providing a full breakdown of the payout), and so on.

Just imagine the pressure workers face when they encounter a sense of false urgency to accept orders. In our conversations with workers, we discovered that many of them feel that algorithms are opaque and unjust. For instance, some feel the system favours certain worker groups  -  those working longer hours or new joiners seem to get more orders.

When we asked workers about who makes these decisions regarding order allocation, pay, and incentives, they mentioned human roles  -  a supervisor, team leader, or even a "team in Bangalore". This notion of the "algorithmic human manager" seems unique to India (as compared to Western gig-workers) and is inscrutable. Issue 2: Human touch is missing: Post Covid-19, platforms have reduced on-ground staff and have started relying on AI-based chatbots for grievance redressal.

One worker remarked: "When we are out for deliveries, only chat support is there to help us." This works well for time-sensitive, repetitive issues that arise during gigs (such as cancelling rides/orders or contacting customers). However, for issues around payouts, incentives, penalties, and ID deactivations, workers feel that the system is inadequate. One worker remarked, "the chatbot does not listen to or understand our issues.

It only responds based on the data fed into it." Workers want to talk to a human being. They feel the lack of a human touch especially in cases where algorithms fail to account (or even penalise workers) for factors beyond their control  -  such as delays caused by traffic delays and rains. The solutions include creating more transparent algorithms and human-in-the-loop processes.

For instance, the government, in partnership with academic institutions, can create and maintain a public repository of known dark patterns and design patterns for gig work. Platform companies may be encouraged to self-evaluate their systems against this repository and voluntarily report on their mitigation efforts. Platforms should also provide workers with clear, simple, and multilingual explanations of how algorithms affect their work allocation, performance ratings, and wages.

Further, they should conduct internal audits on the impact of algorithms on workers. Such audits can be conducted with academic institutes. Lastly, platforms should implement a multi-level grievance redressal system where issues can be escalated from chatbots to human agents. They should ensure a human-in-the-loop for all high-stakes decisions, such as account deactivations, to guarantee due process and fairness.

Forget about the 10-minute promise for deliveries. Maybe it is time to think about a 10-minute grievance redressal for gig-workers. By Omir Kumar & Krishnan Narayanan Kumar is Policy Analyst, and Narayanan is Researcher, at the Centre for Responsible AI, IIT Madras
