Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 194

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Endeavour 
A. high 
2. Soaring 
B. path 
3. Trajectory 
C. captivate 
4. Lofty 
D. surging 
5. Enthral 
E. effort 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- B 
4- A 
5- C 

            End of chapter: On Governors and reshuffle 
The shuffle of Governors aids perception of central interference 
In inglorious chapter of unedifying lessons in constitutional statecraft may be ending in 
Tamil Nadu with the transfer of Governor R.N. Ravi to West Bengal following the sudden 
and inexplicable resignation of incumbent C.V. Ananda Bose. The gubernatorial change 
of guard in these poll-bound States comes alongside that of five other States and two Union 
Territories. Rajendra Vishwanath Arlekar, Governor of Kerala, another State facing 
elections, will hold additional charge in Tamil Nadu. While Mr. Bose and Mr. Ravi had repeatedly 
administered political pinpricks to elected governments, Mr. Bose's relations with West Bengal Chief 
Minister Mamata Banerjee had recently improved. Mr. Ravi made no such allowances to the M.K. Stalin 
dispensation. As recently as January, he walked out of the Assembly, for the fourth year. Each time, 
The found a reason or manufactured an excuse for not fulfilling his mandate of delivering the Special 
Address to the House, under Article 176. Relations between Lok Bhavan and Fort St. George have 
remained strained since 2022, when Mr. Ravi returned a Bill - instead of reserving it for the President 
- seeking exemption from the central mandate of NEET-based medical admissions. The House 
historically readopted and re-sent the Bill to Lok Bhavan. Thereafter, Mr. Ravi created legislative 
paralysis by indefinitely delaying his decision on Bills, abusing powers under Article 200. He even argued 
that if a Governor withholds assent, the Bill is "dead", a position rejected by the Supreme Court in the 
Punjab case (2023). He chose to continue in office, even after the Court, in 2025, nullified his inaction 
on 10 Bills and granted them "deemed assent". Perhaps, he had become immune to controversies. 
The Home Ministry once forced him to backtrack after he unilaterally dismissed an arrested Minister. On 
another occasion, the Court rapped him for refusing to administer oath to a Minister whose conviction 
had been suspended by the judiciary. 
Beyond such constitutional misadventures, Mr. Ravi also never fought shy of endorsing right-leaning 
ideologies, often appearing to position himself as a political opponent of the ruling DMK. He not only 
dubbed Mr. Stalin's 'Dravidian model' slogan an "expired ideology" but also characterized it as a 
"sectarian" thought. His posture helped the DMK further its political campaign, accusing the Narendra 
Modi government of using Mr. Ravi to undermine the popular will expressed through the House. It is 
difficult to tell whether his transfer is meant to deprive Mr. Stalin of this political weapon or to end Ms. 
Banerjee's comfort with Mr. Bose in an election season. But one thing appears clear: history may not 
treat Mr. Ravi's tenure in Tamil Nadu as worthy of emulation in the conduct of Centre-State relations. 
A


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Rapped 
A. invalidated 
2. Incumbent 
B. shameful 
3. Inexplicable 
C. current 
4. Inglorious 
D. rebuked 
5. Nullified 
E. unexplainable 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Broad base: On India and the ICC T20 World Cup win 
India revealed depth in batting and fielding in cricket's shortest format 
India lived up to its billing of being the number one side in Twenty20 Internationals (T20I). The Men 
in Blue retained the ICC T20 World Cup with an emphatic 96-run triumph over New Zealand in 
the final at Ahmedabad on Sunday. Often in global sporting tournaments, the more fancied athlete 
or squad may fail at times as the law of averages catches up; it is to the credit of Suryakumar 
Yadav's men that they remained consistent and lasted the distance. Having won the title in 2024 
under the leadership of Rohit Sharma, this Indian unit has evolved further. There has been a change in 
personnel too, as Rohit, Virat Kohli and Ravindra Jadeja retired from cricket's shortest format. Their 
massive shoes were filled, and with coach Gautam Gambhir propagating a high-risk, high-yield 
philosophy, the players followed their mentor's approach and prospered. Including the summit clash, 
India went past 250 thrice in the championship. The think-tank was also flexible as an initial top-order 
vulnerability was addressed in time. With three left-handers atop the batting tree, the Indians found 
rival captains employing off-spinners to counter the batters. Abhishek Sharma losing form also proved to 
be a complication but by picking the right-handed Sanju Samson as opener, balance was found. 
Great teams find ways to cope with challenges, and India, even after losing a Super Eight game to South 
Africa, stayed afloat. The management persisted with Abhishek and he scored two fifties in the 
campaign, with the one in the final being vital. Samson, though, was a revelation. Always rated high, at 
varying points in his career he was competing with M.S. Dhoni, Dinesh Karthik and Rishabh Pant for the 
wicket-keeper batter role. With 321 runs in this championship and three consecutive 50-plus scores in 
the last stretch for India, the 'Player of the Tournament' ensured that the host fulfilled expectations. If 
Samson led India's batting charts, the incisive Jasprit Bumrah and spinner Varun Chakaravarthy 
finished with 14 wickets apiece and held the top spot in this World Cup. Bumrah was terrific while Varun 
found it rough towards the business end of the campaign as batters turned aggressive against him. 
India found heroes at critical points, be it Ishan Kishan, Tilak Varma, Hardik Pandya, Shivam Dube or 
Axar Patel. Among the rest, New Zealand proved why it remains one of the most resilient teams, sailing 
into another final before running into India. That outfits such as Nepal had their moments is also a 
pointer to how T20Is are helping cricket broaden its base. 
I