Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 192

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Sabotaged 
A. opponent 
2. Mercurial 
B. remnant 
3. Adversary 
C. brutality 
4. Thuggery 
D. destroyed 
5. Vestige 
E. volatile 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- B 

            New reality: On new series of national accounts data 
Fiscal targets will now be realigned based on more accurate data 
The release of the new series of national accounts data is a heartening improvement to India's 
key economic statistics, but the data highlights some aspects that merit policy attention. The 
new series updates the base year of India's Gross Domestic Product and Gross Value Added 
data to 2022-23 from the earlier 2011-12. [A1] This was a long-overdue update, [A]/ each 
passing year [B]/ becoming more outdated [C]/ and unrepresentative with [D]/ since the 
earlier data was [E]. Apart from the updated base year, the new series has several methodological 
improvements and new data sources for greater robustness. For example, the adoption of the double-
deflator approach, which accounts for the effect of inflation separately for intermediate goods and the 
final product, is a marked improvement in terms of ascertaining the real value added of India's 
production. Similarly, the new series allocates multi-sector company output proportionately, improving 
sectoral data accuracy. The data on households will now be obtained from the Annual Survey of 
Unincorporated Sector Enterprises (ASUSE) and Periodic Labour Force Survey (PLFS) on an annual 
basis instead of relying on extrapolations as was done in the 2011-12 series. Notably, the Goods and 
Services Tax data, a goldmine of consumer data, will be used in the new series. The new series will also 
include new sources and methods of estimation for sectors that have historically been difficult to quantify 
such as the agricultural sector and the vast informal sector. All of these should yield a more accurate 
picture of India's economic size and growth. 
The new series predicts India's GDP to grow 7.6% in the current financial year 2025-26, which is faster 
than the 7.4% predicted for the year in the old series. While the rate might bring cheer, the new absolute 
size of the economy is somewhat sobering. The new series pegs India's economy at ₹345.47 lakh crore 
in 2025-26, which is about 3.3% smaller than what was predicted based on the old series. The size of 
the economy in both 2023-24 and 2024-25 was also revised downward by 3.8% each. Along with the 
depreciation of the rupee, this has meant that India is currently a $3.8 trillion economy, with the $5 trillion 
target moving further away. A smaller economic size also means the Centre's various commitments to 
lower the fiscal deficit and debt - ratios that are pegged to nominal GDP - also become that much 
tougher to achieve. That said, it is better to realign targets based on more accurate data than to blithely 
forge ahead with decade-old metrics. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Demonstrated 
A. attempt 
2. Essay 
B. fractured 
3. Rapport 
C. showed 
4. Ruptured 
D. struggle 
5. Tussle 
E. connection 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- D 

            Reckless wreckers: on threats to nuclear facilites 
Damaging nuclear facilities under an unstable regime poses great risks 
uclear facilities have faced unprecedented threats of late. Since its capture by Russian 
forces in 2022, Ukraine's Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant has faced repeated shelling 
and drone strikes. While Russia wished to be the sole nuclear-armed successor to the 
Soviet Union, Israel has viewed Iran's nuclear programme as an existential threat and has 
attacked its weapons sites since 2024. In 2025, the U.S. launched targeted strikes against 
Fordow and Natanz, which enrich uranium, and Isfahan, a fuel cycle complex. U.S. President Donald 
Trump claimed they were "obliterated" but the IAEA found that the enriched uranium stockpile was 
largely intact at Isfahan. On March 2, the IAEA had said that the Bushehr and Tehran reactors had not 
been hit or damaged until then, although strikes on March 3 surfaced reports of damage to the Bushehr 
airport (according to Iran's state media) and again in Natanz. The broader pattern of attacking nuclear 
facilities is worrisome. Aside from overt attempts, at least one hacking attempt has breached the 
National Nuclear Security Administration, which manages the U.S.'s nuclear stockpile, while ransomware 
groups have targeted global energy firms and Brazil's state nuclear operator. The Geneva Conventions 
prohibit states from endangering nuclear facilities if they release "dangerous forces" but neither the U.S. 
nor Israel seems mindful of the risks. Iran has also accused the IAEA of spying for Israel. 
Physically destroying a facility only removes one layer of risk; the humanitarian and environmental 
effects are often intractable. A damaged reactor core or spent fuel pool could release caesium-137, a 
long-lived isotope that causes acute radiation sickness and contaminates land for decades. Radioactive 
particles can be carried by winds, affecting global food security. Damaging nuclear facilities overseen 
by an unstable regime also risks loss of custody of enriched uranium. Such strikes do not achieve a 
strategic resolution and could in fact accelerate Iran's resolve, marked by its shift of assets to deeper, 
more clandestine facilities. Military force also destroyed the diplomatic and verification frameworks 
required for long-term safety, leaving negotiations as the safest way to restore stability in the region. Iran 
is already facing 60% inflation and the U.S. can trade sanctions relief for IAEA monitoring. Iran has also 
finalised long-term deals with Russia and China, in return securing air defences and navigation systems 
to negate western advantages, and bringing Tehran back to the table could also reduce its dependence 
on these burgeoning partnerships. Conversely, military action risks refugee exodus from a population 
of 93 million, asymmetric retaliation against the U.S.'s Gulf bases, and the inalienable threat of 
nuclear disaster. 
N