Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 179

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Stability 
A. chaotic 
2. Agile 
B. avoiding 
3. Emerging 
C. steadiness 
4. Eschewing 
D. flexible 
5. Turbulent 
E. developing 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Credible and creditable: On Union Budget 2026-27 
The Union Budget 2026-27 chose prudence over adventurism, and multipronged 
measures over Big Bang reforms 
here Budget 2025 was largely dominated by the income-tax rate and slab 
relaxations, Budget 2026 has done away with Big Bang measures. Instead, its 
scattershot approach, through various sectoral and issue-based measures, when 
taken together, is aimed at propelling India's growth over the medium term. Given 
the level of geoeconomic and geopolitical uncertainties that the Indian economy 
faces, this diffused approach is likely a more effective policy than targeted Big Bang announcements 
would be. This is not the time for further disruption. Budget 2026 contains announcements for the 
manufacturing sector, various services sectors, as well as particular provisions to help labour-intensive 
sectors such as textiles and leather. In terms of manufacturing, the Budget includes measures covering 
seven well thought-out areas: biopharma, semiconductors, electronics, rare earths, chemicals, capital 
goods and textiles. Semiconductor and electronics manufacturing are the few sectors that have gained 
from the government's existing PLI schemes. The India Semiconductor Mission 2.0 and the increased 
allocation under the Electronics Component Manufacturing Scheme are appropriate follow-ups to this. 
These are sectors where India needs to become globally competitive. The Biopharma SHAKTI scheme 
is aimed at making India a global biopharma manufacturing hub with an allocation of ₹10,000 crore over 
the next five years. Pharmaceuticals, already a sector that India does well in, are exempt from the 
U.S.'s 50% tariffs. It is also important to support those sectors that are currently hit by those same tariffs. 
The National Export Promotion Mission announced in the last Budget was implemented only by 
December 2025, nine months into the financial year. The Centre should ensure that this Budget's 
integrated programme for the textiles sector does not face similar delays. Also, the various measures 
aimed at creating 'Champion MSMEs', providing them equity, liquidity, and professional support, must 
be implemented quickly. MSMEs account for 48.6% of India's exports, and the EU FTA, even if it is 
implemented soon, will not kick in quick enough to offset the ongoing pain caused by the U.S. tariffs. 
The services sector, too, stands to benefit from Budget 2026. The high-powered 'education to 
employment and enterprise' standing committee, announced by the Finance Minister, should get off 
the ground soon. The focus on health care and medical tourism, where India is already developing 
strengths, is a good start. In keeping with the Budget's multipronged approach, the Centre has sought to 
cater to the election-bound States this year through several smaller announcements - such as 
dedicated rare earth corridors to benefit Odisha, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, a Coconut 
W

            Promotion Scheme for Kerala, an integrated East Coast Industrial Corridor for West Bengal, and the first 
of the new national waterways to begin in Odisha - rather than through the consolidated packages of 
the past. 
As for the Centre's finances, Budget 2026 offers a mix of expenditure enthusiasm and revenue 
sobriety. The capital expenditure push, especially with regard to infrastructure creation, has continued, 
perhaps in reaction to the realisation that current conditions do not encourage private investment. 
Overall, capital expenditure is set to grow to ₹12.2 lakh crore in 2026-27, amounting to 4.4% of GDP, the 
highest in at least the last 10 years. This includes the announcement of dedicated freight corridors and 
training institutes for the manpower needed. These rail corridors are also to be supplemented by a 
Coastal Cargo Promotion Scheme to incentivise increasing the share of inland waterways and coastal 
shipping. It is noteworthy that the Centre has revised downwards its capital expenditure for 2025-26 to 
₹10.9 lakh crore from the ₹11.2 lakh crore initially budgeted. It remains to be seen if this year's target will 
be met, but even coming close will provide a substantial fillip to the economy. On the revenue front, the 
Centre did not announce any major tax cuts for individuals or corporations. In 2019 and 2025, 
respectively, corporations and individuals received substantial tax relief. To announce more would have 
put undue stress on central finances at a time when its expenditure commitments - known and 
anticipated - are substantial. However, while direct taxes have largely received procedural 
improvements, the Budget has included a slew of indirect tax relaxations for the promotion of marine, 
leather and textile products exports, and speeding up India's energy transition. The tax revenue 
projections are largely sober. Corporate tax revenue is projected to grow nearly 14% over the Budget 
estimates of 2025-26. This is broadly in line with the revised estimates for 2025-26 coming in 12.4% 
higher than the actuals of the previous year. Income-tax revenue has been budgeted to grow 1.9% over 
the BE of 2025-26 - an expected outcome following last Budget's substantial rate relaxations. Gross 
GST revenue has been projected to contract 13.5% in 2026-27, a reflection of the September 2025 rate 
rationalisation and the end of the Compensation Cess. Taken together, the Centre's fiscal deficit has 
been projected at 4.3% of GDP in 2026-27, down from 4.4% estimated for 2025-26. While the Centre's 
fiscal consolidation path since the COVID-19 pandemic has been admirable, continued aggression in 
reducing the deficit deserves some questioning. Even the Economic Survey argued for some fiscal 
flexibility for the Centre given the geoeconomic and geopolitical conditions. Overall, Budget 2026 may 
disappoint those looking for massive tax relief or subsidies, but is nevertheless a credible and 
creditable effort.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Enthusiasm 
A. boosting 
2. Propelling 
B. reliable 
3. Contract 
C. moderate 
4. Sober 
D. eagerness 
5. Credible 
E. shrink 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- C 
5- B 

            A cautious nudge: On the 16th Finance Commission's recommendations 
Only structural change can restore the balance in fiscal federalism 
In its much-awaited recommendations, which were also tabled on Sunday, the Sixteenth Finance 
Commission (FC-16), as anticipated, has recommended that the vertical devolution ratio - the 
States' share in the divisible pool of Central taxes - be retained at 41% for the period 2026-31. 
States want this to be 50%. This is despite the Commission acknowledging the tightening fiscal 
space States face under the GST framework, and that the growing mismatch between 
expenditure responsibilities and assured revenues has increasingly left them with "recourse to 
market borrowings" as the principal adjustment mechanism. Predictably, several States have 
criticised the projected devolutions for the coming fiscal but have also cautiously welcomed a tweak in 
the horizontal devolution formula. The FC-16 has reworked the earlier "tax effort" criterion into a broader 
"contribution to GDP" measure and raised its weight sharply - from 2.5% under the FC-15 to 10%. This 
change is intended to reward productive and efficient States and represents a modest but meaningful 
attempt to link governance outcomes with fiscal transfers. 
However, the resulting gains are deliberately restrained. The FC-16 makes it clear that any 
restructuring of horizontal devolution must be undertaken "gradually", to avoid abrupt redistributive 
shocks to States that are more dependent on transfers. Accordingly, the weight accorded to 
demographic performance has been reduced, reflecting the view that penalising population growth is no 
longer appropriate at a time when India is close to the peak of its demographic dividend. Conversely, 
the weight for population size has been modestly increased. The net effect is that industrialised States 
such as Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra see only incremental improvements in their inter-State shares. 
This caution is understandable but also underscores the limits of the Commission's ambition. A stronger 
signal could have been sent through a staggered increase in vertical devolution, for instance by 
committing to raise the States' share to 45% by 2031, expanding discretionary fiscal space while 
preserving stability. The FC-16 flags the shrinking of the effective divisible pool due to cesses and 
surcharges but stops short of correcting this by recommending their inclusion in the pool. To be sure, 
total transfers to States are budgeted to rise by 12.2% between 2025-26 (RE) and 2026-27 (BE). But 
₹1.2 lakh crore - or about 42% of this increase - is from revenue transfers under Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes, reinforcing a governance model in which States act as implementers of priorities set in New 
Delhi. The FC-16's recommendations recognise the stresses in State finances but do not push for the 
structural change needed to restore the balance in fiscal federalism. 
I