Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 251

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Encapsulate 
A. cure 
2. Heal 
B. reveal 
3. Wither 
C. integration 
4. Expose 
D. summarize 
5. Convergence 
E. decline 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Time to push back: On India and the continuing U.S. pressure 
The U.S. has been emboldened to make increasing demands on India 
The latest accusation levelled by the United States against India has the potential to be the 
most harmful to the Indian economy. A recent White House report, naming around 40 
countries in all, has said that India ranks among the top 'enablers' of China's evasion of U.S. 
tariffs. The accusation is that India and these other countries are importing Chinese goods, 
making minor modifications to them, and then exporting them to the U.S. at lower tariffs than 
what Chinese goods would have faced. The fact that Chinese imports form a significant pillar of Indian 
manufacturing is no secret. Yet, the nature of these imports is slowly changing. India is gradually 
moving away from importing finished products, making cosmetic changes, and selling them. Instead, 
the share of intermediate goods in Indian imports from China has been steadily rising. That is, India is 
doing much of its own assembly and manufacturing in several sectors now, relying on China and other 
countries for the parts needed. This shift is an important step towards full-scale manufacturing in India. 
The U.S. has not yet announced punitive actions based on its assessment of apparent Chinese tariff 
evasion, though that eventuality is conceivable. However, should it do so, India must resist bowing to 
U.S. pressure on this issue. As even the government has admitted, Chinese imports right now are an 
important part of the Make in India story. 
The fear of India bowing to U.S. pressure is based on precedent. In his first term as U.S. President, 
Donald Trump railed against India's tariffs on high-end motorcycles. In 2018, India cut these tariffs to 
50% from the earlier 60%-75%, and then cut them further to 40% in February 2025, before trade deal 
talks had even started. Similarly, it slashed the import duties on shrimp feed and its components in the 
February 2024 Budget, a key ask of the U.S. It did the same with tariffs on frozen duck and turkey. The 
pressure of the 50% punitive tariffs pushed India to diversify away from Russian oil, despite India's 
strident claims of energy sovereignty and the discount it was receiving. Russia's share in India's oil 
imports fell to below 20% in January 2026, from nearly double that when the 50% tariffs were imposed 
six months earlier. This had happened with Venezuelan oil in 2019 as well. It was the West Asia crisis, 
and the U.S.'s temporary reprieve, that has seen India turning back to Russian oil. Allowing FDI in the 
e-commerce inventory model, as India recently did, was something Amazon had been lobbying for for a 
decade, and a dilution of India's long-held stance. The U.S. can wield immense pressure and so 
concessions are understandable. But that has emboldened it to make increasing demands. India 
needs to start pushing back. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Slashed 
A. blame 
2. Evasion 
B. huge 
3. Accusation 
C. obvious 
4. Immense 
D. escape 
5. Apparent 
E. reduced 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Vote of trust: On Trump's appreciation, clean electoral rolls in India 
Clean electoral rolls are a must, but must not be weaponized by state 
resident Donald Trump's appreciation of India's election mechanism has put the spotlight 
on a highly divisive debate over election integrity in the two democracies. Mr. Trump is 
pushing for an SIR-like exercise in the U.S., but its highly federalised electoral process is 
governed by fragmented rules and politics that resist the idea. His curious social media 
post citing India's Chief Election Commissioner, Gyanesh Kumar, as having wondered how 
the U.S. could conduct elections without a valid photo identity, has renewed concerns over election 
integrity in both the U.S. and India. While no one can disagree that the process should be fair and 
transparent, the agreement ends there. Partisan politics in both countries have fostered political 
mistrust, leading election losers to repeatedly question electoral integrity. The liberal and progressive 
strands, and the conservative and nativist strands in both countries, want to purify and streamline the 
electoral rolls and the processes, but in different and often contradictory ways. India and the U.S. could 
lead a shared democratic agenda on election rules, but only after restoring trust and integrity in their 
electoral processes. 
India's nationalized election administration system has largely worked well, though it now faces a crisis of 
legitimacy. The U.S.'s decentralised system leaves too many loopholes in the process of enrolment and 
voting, and it could benefit from a more robust national framework like the ECI's. The expanded 
Safeguard American Voter Eligibility (SAVE) Act was passed in February and is pending in the Senate. 
The Constitution grants each State its own methods: "...but Congress may at any time by law make or 
alter such regulations", unlike the Indian Constitution, which establishes the ECI as a constitutional body. 
Though there is no ambiguity in existing law either in the U.S. or in India that only citizens may register 
and vote, the process of ensuring this has become hugely controversial in both countries. [P] Of 
citizenship for [A]/ photo ID for voting [B]/ the proposed federal law [C]/ voter registration and [D]/ would 
require proof [E]. In India, the SIR is trying to sneak in this requirement without transparency, adequate 
consultation or sufficient time. The very fact that SIR is meant to be conducted only once in 20 years 
means it should be carried out carefully and inclusively. While ruling dispensations in both countries 
think that the election process is too permissive and allows foreigners to obtain voting rights, their 
opponents point to systematic and premeditated efforts to target social groups in the name of election 
integrity. What is needed is an acceptance that clean electoral rolls of citizens, and voting with photo ID, 
are elementary requirements of a fair process. In both countries, the state must not selectively 
weaponise these requirements against those not in power. 
P