Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 217

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Lethal 
A. felling 
2. Inextricably 
B. fatal 
3. Unglamorous 
C. searing 
4. Scorching 
D. not attractive 
5. Butchering 
E. inseparably 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- D 
4- C 
5- A 

            Language decorum: On the three-language formula in CBSE schools 
School education should not be the site of a cultural battle 
The Supreme Court of India has issued notices to the Union Government, the CBSE, and the 
NCERT, directing them to file a comprehensive report on their logistical preparedness to 
implement a three-language formula in all CBSE schools for Class 9 students from July 1, 
2026. On May 27, while hearing petitioners challenging the CBSE move, the Court declined to 
grant an immediate stay on the policy but acknowledged that concerns over "hardship and 
inconvenience" warranted review. The Court will hear arguments on July 15 and 16. The casual manner 
in which the government is using the CBSE to enforce its contentious language policy once again 
shows complete disregard for students, teachers, and parents. On May 15, the CBSE had issued a 
circular mandating the study of three languages for Class 9 students from July 1, citing alignment with 
the NEP 2020 and the National Curriculum Framework for School Education 2023. At least two of the 
three must be native Indian languages. Foreign languages such as French or German could only be 
taken as a third language if the first two were Indian, or alternatively as an optional fourth subject. In a 
meagre effort to camouflage the hardship unleashed on the students, the CBSE exempted the third 
language from the Class 10 Board examination, which would instead be assessed through school-based 
internal evaluations, though the marks would still appear on the final certificate. 
Barely weeks earlier, the CBSE had stated that the third-language requirement would be deferred until 
the 2029-30 academic year. The abrupt turnabout can only be explained as a political decision. The 
move is being challenged in the Court on multiple grounds, including constitutional ones. The petitioners 
argue that language is a matter of personal choice and cannot be imposed by the state. It is also being 
pointed out that the NEP 2020, in whose name the mandate is being enforced, promises flexibility and 
guarantees that no language shall be imposed on any student or State. The petitioners also argue that 
the CBSE, as an executive body, lacks the authority to impose such a sweeping educational mandate 
without backing from parliamentary legislation, regardless of what the NEP says, being an executive 
policy intent and not a statute. Parents and teachers are alarmed about the added pressure on students 
just before their Board examinations. School administrators have flagged a shortage of trained language 
teachers and the unavailability of appropriate textbooks. Turning school education into a cultural 
battleground is not helping India's ambition to become a global reservoir of advanced human resources. 
The Centre should course-correct before the Court takes up the case again. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Meagre 
A. conceal 
2. Reservoir 
B. controversial 
3. Camouflage 
C. stockpile 
4. Contentious 
D. insufficient 
5. Alarmed 
E. concerned 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- A 
4- B 
5- E 

            Joy and pain: On the NFHS-6 data 
Health gains from NFHS-6 are significant, but there are unaddressed needs too 
hen triumph and disaster arrive at the same time, it is important to celebrate, but 
also, to take stock, assess, and pivot to address the lacuna. The recently released 
National Family Health Survey (NFHS)-6 data offer such an opportunity. The data for 
2023-24 revealed some remarkable gains for India, but also exposed some 
unguarded pathways that will become disastrous if not attended to. The greatest of 
the gains came in the sector of child health - stunting is down by 17%; severe wasting is down 32%; 
institutional deliveries are at over 90%; and full immunisation coverage for children aged 12-23 months 
rose to over 87%. Additionally, the figures show that India's Total Fertility Rate (TFR) had stabilised at 
2.0, below the replacement level of 2.1 Unequivocally, these are gains; ones that India has been 
working on for decades. It is an encouraging sign that the needle has finally moved, in these crucial 
sectors. These gains will have to be built upon, without any drop in service delivery, while remaining 
uncompromising on access or quality of services in the public sector. However, health managers need 
to heed the other side of the paradigm as well. NFHS-6 indicates a 'dual public health burden' - 
obesity (in three years, it had grown from 22.9% to 27.3% among men, while among women, from 24% 
to 30.7%) remains problematic while some level of malnutrition continues, besides the onslaught of 
lifestyle diseases. The survey also showed a decline in exclusive breastfeeding among children under 
six months, from 63.7% in NFHS-5 to 55.8% in NFHS-6. Breast feeding is essential to prevent infant 
malnutrition. 
The NFHS, one of the largest cross-sectional household surveys in the world, could easily be 
considered the primary tool to define public policy, and evidence-based governance, besides tracking 
development indicators. The data it generates are crucial. Other India-level data from similar periods 
indicate similar trends; the SRS and the National Health Accounts Survey reveal the lack of focus or 
funds for lifestyle diseases, and metabolic disorders. The danger of letting this continue will be known 
sooner rather than later, as India progresses through a demographic transition to a greyer nation. At this 
stage, transformations are still possible. Setting up comprehensive screening programmes for NCDs, 
stressing on nation-wide behaviour change communication on diet and exercise, and ensuring higher 
taxes on sugared beverages and packaged foods are all techniques that will help reduce, and limit the 
burden, of NCDs. Bolstering health systems to tackle these NCDs, once they set in, at every level - 
village, town and city - is also critical. 
W