Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 240

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Excavation 
A. dangerous 
2. Precise 
B. delicate 
3. Perilous 
C. unearthing 
4. Fragile 
D. fatal 
5. Lethal 
E. exact 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Core upgrade: On the Index of Core Industries 
The updated Index of Core Industries rounds out economic data upgrades 
The Index of Core Industries (ICI) has finally joined the country's other economic metrics in 
becoming up-to-date and representative of the economy. The other metrics such as the 
national accounts, Consumer Price Index (CPI), Wholesale Price Index (WPI), and the Index 
of Industrial Production (IIP) were updated earlier this year, although even those were after 
considerable delays. The ICI has now joined their ranks with the June data being based on a 
new series with an updated base year, an additional sector being covered, and revised weights and 
methodologies. This is a welcome upgrade. The performance of these core industries is a vital 
barometer of the state of the economy. In the new series, the previous eight sectors have become nine, 
with the vital inclusion of the iron ore sector. Improvements have also been made to how the steel and 
coal sectors are measured in order to remove the previous double-counting that was taking place. The 
addition of a sector would naturally change the distribution of weights of the sectors in the index, but the 
final weights also reflect a broader shift in economic activity. The coal and natural gas sectors have seen 
their weights nearly halve to about 5.6% and 3.8%, respectively. On the other hand, the electricity sector 
now makes up more than 30% of the index from less than 20% in the previous series. All of this perhaps 
reflects the rising share of renewables in electricity generation, even as demand for electricity itself 
surges. 
The performance of the index in June 2026, with a five-month-high growth of 5%, would suggest that 
Indian industry is shrugging off the slump induced by the West Asia crisis. However, two of the 
strong growth numbers - iron ore by 43.9% and electricity by 9.8% - were due to a statistical base 
effect since both sectors had contracted in June last year. It remains to be seen whether the numbers 
will remain this positive once that base effect wears off in the months ahead. The new series highlights 
some of the systemic issues that the old series did, such as the persistent contraction of the crude oil 
and natural gas sectors. They have contracted continuously for 18 and 24 months, respectively. If India 
does not have these resources, that is one thing. But if it has them and still is not able to extract them 
economically, then that is a serious shortcoming. The update of the ICI and the recent upgrade of the 
WPI would have been a good time for a broader statistical reorganisation. With the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation handling the CPI and the IIP, it only makes sense for the WPI and ICI 
to move to it from their current home in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. That change can still be 
made. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Contracted 
A. recession 
2. Vital 
B. shrank 
3. Slump 
C. addition 
4. Extract 
D. crucial 
5. Inclusion 
E. retrieve 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- C 

            On guard: on India and the Qdenga dengue vaccine 
The dengue vaccine must be made affordable to those at greatest risk 
The CDSCO's approval of the Qdenga dengue vaccine - the first in India's history - follows 
the vaccine's licensing in over 40 countries and a WHO prequalification, and some of the 
country's worst dengue years vis-à-vis the disease's burden, although that is evidence of 
better surveillance as well. The Aedes mosquitoes that spread the disease are expanding 
into semi-urban and rural districts, where conventional vector control is harder to sustain. The 
time to develop the vaccine itself is understandable. The four antigenically distinct dengue serotypes 
and the possibility of a 'second infection' by a different serotype producing more severe disease through 
antibody-dependent enhancement mean that an effective shot has to induce strong immunity against all 
four at once. This constraint nearly derailed the first licensed dengue vaccine, Dengvaxia, and the 
controversy in the Philippines in 2017 prompted greater regulatory caution. The design of Qdenga, by 
Japan-based Takeda, differs from that of Dengvaxia and, unlike the latter, can be administered without 
screening for a prior dengue infection. 
Its protection against the serotypes varies from highest against DENV-2, followed by DENV-1, while 
uncertainty remains regarding protection against DENV-3 and DENV-4 in people without prior exposure 
to dengue. This is concerning because while DENV-2 is more common in India, DENV-3 prevalence is 
increasing. If the DENV-3 serotype dominates the 2026 monsoon season, Qdenga's impact could be 
substantially lower than anticipated, especially if many recipients are dengue-naïve. Qdenga also 
requires two doses across three months apart. Clinical data suggest that the first dose protects unevenly, 
with stronger evidence against DENV-1 and DENV-2 than DENV-3 and DENV-4. If a seronegative 
person takes the first shot on July 1, when the monsoon begins, and encounters DENV-3 in August, the 
shot may not suffice to prevent severe illness. Ensuring the highly mobile migrant workforce receives its 
second dose will be significantly difficult, too; those falling through the cracks may also be exposed to 
concerns raised in the TIDES trial of a 'negative efficacy' against hospitalisation related to DENV-3 
among seronegative children. Finally, following Takeda's tiered pricing strategy worldwide, Qdenga may 
be too expensive for people living in dense urban slums with poor drainage. To ensure sufficient uptake 
among the populations at greatest risk, the government must negotiate a lower price. In the end, 
administering a dengue vaccine properly in a population is no less tricky than developing a vaccine 
against dengue, and the Qdenga rollout should give no cause for complacency. 
T