Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 168

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Slump 
A. noticeable 
2. Unmissable 
B. required 
3. Intact 
C. decline 
4. Obligated 
D. whole 
5. Strike 
E. protest 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- D 
4- B 
5- E 

            Off the guard rails: On the Grok case, explicit imagery 
Those abusing an AI model's capabilities with illegal requests must face action 
The generative artificial intelligence (AI) chatbot Grok developed by social media platform X, 
formerly Twitter, has a sordid but compelling unique service proposition: it avoids the kinds 
of safeguards, both commonsensical and cautious, that other large firms such as OpenAI and 
Google have instituted in their large language models. This laissez parler attitude has resulted 
in novelties, such as the chatbot freely insulting national politicians and celebrities alike. But a 
specific behaviour that has come to light in recent days is alarming: Grok has been responding to user 
requests to non-consensually generate sexually suggestive and explicit images of women. Days after 
New Year's eve, when such requests crowded Grok's X account, the behaviour continues, in spite of 
stunned reactions and demands for guard rails from India and France. In response to calls for 
accountability, X's billionaire owner Elon Musk has responded not with reassurances, but with a joking 
request for the chatbot to dress him skimpily too, as though doing so to oneself and subjecting 
strangers to such a crime - for it is a crime to create imagery like this - were in any way comparable. 
Mr. Musk's other corporate entities have chimed in with jokes of their own, dismissing the gravity of the 
public-facing capabilities they have put in the hands of users. 
The Union government has rightly demanded that X cease image generation of this kind, and pointedly 
referred to the criminal nature of generating sexually explicit imagery of women in this manner. On top of 
the viscerally provocative nature of such patently criminal content, Grok has added to the overall 
hostility of being a gender minority on the Internet. There are aspects of this where neither the 
government nor social media platforms have inspired much confidence, with sexual violence and death 
threats to prominent and outspoken women transpiring with impunity in both cyberspace and the real 
world. X's impunity rests on an assumption that the geopolitical power of the United States, especially 
under its current government, will protect it from any serious blowback for its cruel handling of such 
sensitive matters. Even as the government pushes back against the social media platform - which it 
has not necessarily done with virtuous aims in the past - it must vigorously push for the prosecution 
of people who encourage the public creation and circulation of non-consensual intimate imagery. The 
easy proliferation of these tools must not be coupled with a fearlessness to leverage their worst 
capabilities, and this must be made clear by making an example of those who do. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Explicit 
A. persuasive 
2. Stunned 
B. discontinue 
3. Compelling 
C. shocked 
4. Cease 
D. famous 
5. Prominent 
E. clear 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Dangerous paradigm: On Trump, Venezuela and unhinged depredation 
Trump has lowered the threshold of norms for conduct on global stage 
ollowing the kidnapping and removal to U.S. soil of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro and 
This wife, on the back of military action not authorised by Congress or supported by the UN, 
U.S. President Donald Trump has now made clear his intent to set the crosshairs of American 
neo-imperialist expansionism on other nations and territories including Colombia, Greenland, 
Mexico, Cuba, and Iran. The Trump administration surprised the world, and apparently 
Venezuelan military forces, when it launched an overnight strike on Caracas over the weekend, including 
likely use of artillery and special forces, to extract the Maduros to face federal drug trafficking and 
weapons charges - charges that Mr. Maduro pleaded not guilty to. Responding to media after the event, 
Mr. Trump appeared to be setting his sights on Colombian President Gustavo Petro, when he said that 
that country was being "run by a sick man who likes making cocaine and selling it to the U.S.," and "He's 
not going to be doing it for very long." Similarly, Mr. Trump has remarked that the U.S. has a "need" for 
Greenland from the perspective of its "national security", that "something will have to be done about 
Mexico" to rid the nation of the scourge of drug cartels, that Cuba is "ready to fall" in the absence of 
revenue linked to Venezuelan oil, and that Iran would be "hit very hard by the U.S." if it cracked down on 
protesters on its soil. 
While the Trump administration has consistently lowered the threshold of norms and acceptable 
standards for the conduct of nations on the global stage and diverged from the positions of previous 
Democrat- and Republican-led governments on the threat posed, for example by Russia to Europe, to 
directly engage in unauthorised and illegal interference of a brazen kind and seek regime change 
through the use of force in an established hemispheric power is a new low. The deeper danger of this 
so called "Donroe Doctrine" - ultimately premised on seizing Venezuela's cherished oil resources 
rather than any pretext of "restoring democracy" - is that it may embolden autocrats and nations with 
an appetite for fomenting conflict to engage in similar destabilising unilateral military action against 
perceived enemies, potentially resulting in full-fledged cross-border confrontations. Today's Venezuela 
was yesterday's Ukraine and might be tomorrow's Taiwan, if Mr. Trump's paradigm for settling scores 
propagates further. While the leaders of each potential future target of U.S. aggression and the UN 
leadership have protested such action by Washington, it might take nothing less than the major powers 
of today, including India, Europe, Australia, Africa and Latin America, speaking in one voice against this 
unhinged depredation by the Trump administration to halt this dangerous new paradigm in its tracks. 
F