Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 204

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Steep 
A. without 
2. Suo motu 
B. practical 
3. Spurred 
C. sharp 
4. Feasible 
D. voluntarily 
5. Sans 
E. prompted 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Gulf within: On the UAE leaving OPEC 
Differences with Saudi Arabia and Iran's attacks led to the UAE's exit from OPEC 
The UAE has withdrawn from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), a 
cartel that it joined in 1967, and OPEC+. It was OPEC's fourth-largest producer (3.12 million 
barrels per day) and its third-largest exporter (2.88 mbd) in 2025, behind Saudi Arabia and 
Iraq. The Emiratis clearly sought to free themselves of production constraints set largely by 
the cartel's dominant producer, Saudi Arabia. With significant spare capacity, the Emiratis 
believe that they are better off with the autonomy to ramp up exports, a capability now constrained by 
the de facto closure of the Strait of Hormuz, the largest disruption to oil supply in history, following U.S.-
Israel attacks on Iran. Brent crude prices barely budged on the announcement, revealing how heavily 
the Strait crisis weighs on the market. But once the UAE weathers this crisis, whether through the Strait's 
reopening, or by routing more crude through a pipeline bypassing Hormuz, analysts estimate that it 
could lift production by roughly a million barrels a day. While Saudi Arabia, OPEC's bellwether, has 
remained chary of over-supply and sought to keep prices high, the UAE has long pushed for higher 
production for revenues that it intends to funnel into AI infrastructure and other diversification projects. 
Unsaid in the UAE's move is also its frustration with what it sees as a lack of cartel-wide coordination in 
responding to Iran's missile and drone attacks on Gulf oil and military facilities; Iran is also an OPEC 
member. The Emiratis have also differed sharply with the Saudis on external interventions: in Yemen 
and Sudan. The UAE also seeks closer ties with Israel than most Gulf states, which remain 
uncomfortable with any thaw given Israel's genocidal actions in Gaza and its attacks on Iran and 
Lebanon. The U.S., a non-OPEC member, and the world's largest oil producer at 13.6 mbd, has long 
viewed the cartel's price-setting unfavourably, and President Donald Trump has repeatedly pressed it to 
pump more. The UAE perhaps calculates that aligning with Washington will yield benefits for its 
production and pipeline ambitions, though Mr. Trump's transactional and mercurial foreign policy offers 
little guarantee. The UAE's exit also reflects a structural issue: OPEC's share of global crude dropped to 
36.7% in 2025, and with Hormuz shut, pricing power has shifted to American producers in the short term. 
OPEC will continue, but with a reduced ability to set prices. For net oil-importing countries such as India, 
however, the immediate threat is not the cartel's unravelling but the "double blockade" in the Strait of 
Hormuz and the fragile Iran-U.S. ceasefire. Unless a new geopolitical detente emerges between Iran 
and the Gulf states, volatility will persist, threatening energy security regardless of what unfolds within 
OPEC. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Mercurial 
A. indicator 
2. Chary 
B. actually 
3. Bellwether 
C. delicate 
4. De facto 
D. cautious 
5. Fragile 
E. volatile 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Work in progress: On the Household social consumption (health) survey 
India must strengthen public sector hospital capacity 
The 80th, and latest, round of the household social consumption (health) survey conducted by 
the National Statistical Office is the first comprehensive survey of its kind in both the post-
pandemic era and the period in which the Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya 
Yojana (PMJAY) scheme attained maturity. The previous two surveys of the same kind 
revealed that most Indians did not have any form of health insurance. Since PMJAY's launch 
in 2018, the 80th round shows that insurance coverage has expanded around threefold, accounting for 
an increasing share of health-care financing in hospitals. However, the hospitalisation rate has not 
recovered to the 2014 level, meaning that having an insurance card still does not guarantee access to a 
bed, and hidden costs continue to limit access. The reimbursement rates under PMJAY and State-
funded insurance schemes are often below market rates, so private hospitals compensate by billing 
patients separately for diagnostics and ancillary services. In other words, while state-funded health 
insurance is subsidising private health-care providers' access to low-income markets without also 
enforcing regulated prices, the combined system provides a safety net where insurance covers 
hospitalisation and the public network has improved financial protection for households seeking primary 
care. Second, the Proportion of Population Reported Ailing has doubled, while infectious diseases have 
declined and non-communicable diseases have increased. Economists have interpreted this as a 
sign of more people seeking care, thus becoming 'visible' to the health-care sector. 
Previous surveys singled out out-of-pocket expenses (OOPE) on health care as a leading cause of 
poverty. In the 80th round, while the mean OOPE has roughly doubled, the median OOPE has dropped, 
to ₹11,285 per hospitalisation and at nearly nothing for public outpatient care. Health-care expenses in 
India are a mix of many low-cost consultations and a few significant and expensive interactions, such as 
surgeries and chronic care. The two trends thus mean that while health care is becoming more 
affordable, thanks to the public sector absorbing the cost of primary and secondary care, health care's 
ability to inflict financial deprivation in a few cases remains high. Part of the problem is the AAM 
network, which provides free medicines and diagnostics, of Ayushman Bharat still being significantly 
underfunded relative to the needs of managing chronic diseases, and where the private sector 
dominates. Thus, overall, the poor have nominal coverage but are often excluded from the benefits of 
coverage in practice while the more insured middle class faces rising catastrophic costs. The next 
phase of health-care reform, after shielding care-seekers from poverty and achieving near-universal 
T

            institutional delivery, will need to strengthen public sector hospital capacity to compete with the private 
sector for tertiary care.