Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 184

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Sustained 
A. persistent 
2. Insidious 
B. provocative 
3. Bypass 
C. entangled 
4. Mired 
D. stealthy 
5. Incendiary 
E. avoid 
Answer: 
1-A 
2- D 
3- E 
4- C 
5- B 

            Farmers' pulse: On India and its demand for pulses 
Only structural reforms in agriculture sector can ensure food security 
India manages its prodigious demand for pulses using a mix of import policy, price stabilisation 
and conditional MSP procurement. Imports are the most sensitive because a single central 
decision can immediately lower household spending when supply is tight, at the expense of hurting 
farmers, and knowing that markets cannot always absorb 'extra' supply. So, when the U.S. said 
that its trade deal with India obligated India to purchase pulses from American suppliers, it implied 
that the government had agreed to committing imports against farmers' interests - a politically fraught 
stance in India since the 2020-21 farm law protests and which might see a revival now. India's pulse 
output has hovered around 2.5 crore tonnes in recent years while demand is estimated to be three crore 
tonnes; imports fill the gap. Pulses account for roughly a quarter of non-cereal protein intake and support 
five crore farmers and their families. In the absence of a reliable MSP regime as for rice and wheat, 
however, farmers face organised neglect due to weak procurement mechanisms, the risks of rain-fed 
cultivation, and yields lower than international competitors. In 2019-24, government procurement under 
the Price Support Scheme fluctuated between 2.9% and 12.4% of production. Many States also have 
inadequate procurement centres, forcing farmers to sell to private traders regardless of the official MSP. 
As a result, farmers are incentivised to underinvest in pulses, leading to a vicious cycle. 
India recently announced ambitious initiatives to solve this problem, an example being the October 2025 
self-sufficiency Mission, with a ₹11,440 crore outlay, targeting 310 lakh hectares of cultivation and 350 
lakh tonnes of production by 2030-31. But farmers remain sceptical since older promises have yet to 
materialise. All this is why the initial apparent inclusion of pulses in the U.S. documents, describing what 
India would open to American agri-imports, hit a raw nerve among India's farmers. Opening the market 
to U.S. pulses would further depress domestic prices and directly contradict the government's new 
Mission. Breaking this cycle would require more than removing objectionable words from an agreement, 
including addressing the procurement infrastructure deficit, providing genuine MSP guarantees, 
investing in productivity improvements for rain-fed areas where pulses are grown, and creating market 
systems that explicitly reward farmers who choose to cultivate pulses. Until such structural reforms 
materialise, however, pulse farmers will continue to occupy a precarious position in India's agricultural 
economy and India will continue to depend on imports to meet its demand, perpetuating both food 
security vulnerabilities and political sensitivity around any trade agreement that appears to favour 
foreign producers. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Obligated 
A. cruel 
2. Vicious 
B. uncertain 
3. Explicit 
C. doubtful 
4. Skeptical 
D. bound 
5. Precarious 
E. clear 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- C 
5- B 

            Overdue upgrade: On the new series of the Consumer Price Index 
The new CPI series will aid policymaking and bolster data stability 
The new series of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), released on Thursday, has addressed the 
many shortcomings of the previous series. The new series has a base year of 2024, and is 
pegged to consumption patterns from the Household Consumption Expenditure Survey 2023-
24. The previous series had a base year of 2012 and was based on consumption patterns of 
2011-12. As Chief Economic Adviser V. Anantha Nageswaran noted, India has changed 
markedly over the last decade or so, including consumption behaviour and the composition of household 
expenditure. For example, 80 crore households receive free foodgrain now, which naturally reduces how 
much they need to spend on food. Simultaneously, several new service offerings have emerged, such 
as over-the-top (OTT) video streaming, and online marketplaces. The new series commendably tries to 
address these changes. The weightage of food and beverages in the overall CPI has been reduced to 
36.75% from the earlier 45.86%. This is significant since food inflation was having an outsized influence 
on the overall CPI, despite forming a shrinking part of households' monthly expenditures. The index also 
covers more items, increasing its granularity and representativeness. Notably, this increase includes a 
larger number of goods and services. India's service economy is growing faster than the economy's 
average growth rate, and so price levels here are an increasingly important factor. The new index also 
collects data from more marketplaces across the country, and, for the first time, includes 12 online 
marketplaces. 
More accurate inflation data have several implications for macroeconomic stability and monetary and 
fiscal policy. Food inflation in India is notoriously volatile, quickly reflecting supply bottlenecks as well 
as the vagaries of the weather. A more realistic weightage for food in the CPI stands to make the 
overall index more stable. This, in turn, can increase predictability in Budget-making, since some 
aspects are linked to the CPI, such as inflation-indexed dearness allowance and dearness relief. As far 
as monetary policy is concerned, an updated CPI gives the Reserve Bank of India's Monetary Policy 
Committee a more accurate picture of inflation as it decides the various policy interest rates. At the 
moment, MoSPI provides a 'linking factor' and leaves it to the public to calculate how earlier inflation data 
would have looked like under the new methodology. It should, instead, provide the back data itself, to 
ease comparative analysis. It should also stick to its plan to revise the CPI every five years, and not wait 
another 11 years to update it. 
T