Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 187

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Enthused 
A. careful 
2. Ravaged 
B. huge 
3. Conscientious 
C. excited 
4. Pristine 
D. destroyed 
5. Gargantuan 
E. pure 
Answer: 
1-C  
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Privacy and transparency: On the RTI Act amendment, petitions 
There must be no information asymmetry between state and citizens 
In Monday, the Supreme Court of India referred a series of petitions challenging the 
amendment to Section 8(1)(j) of the Right to Information (RTI) Act by Section 44(3) of the 
Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act, 2023, to a Constitution Bench, recognising its 
"constitutional sensitivity". The Chief Justice of India even remarked that the Court might 
"have to lay down what is meant by 'personal information'". The RTI Act, 2005 was 
enacted to create an informed citizenry and ensure state accountability, which is vital for a democracy. 
Over two decades later, the DPDP Act has delivered a body blow by diluting one of its foundational 
sections. Section 8(1)(j) originally allowed the withholding of personal information only if it had no 
relationship to any public activity or interest, or if its disclosure resulted in an unwarranted invasion of 
privacy. Crucially, the section included a "public interest override" as an integral feature of the 2005 
Act, permitting disclosure if a Public Information Officer was satisfied that the larger public interest 
justified it. The DPDP amendment removes this override and prohibits the disclosure of "any information 
which relates to personal information", amounting to a blanket ban. This enables rejecting requests 
concerning officials, procurement records, audit reports or public spending. In its campaign for the RTI, 
the Internet Freedom Foundation has highlighted a "legitimate uses" paradox here: while Section 7 of 
the DPDP Act allows the state to process personal data without consent, the RTI amendment prevents 
citizens from using similar principles to seek transparency from the state. Thus, while the government 
can monitor the citizen, the citizen is denied the ability to scrutinize the government. 
This amendment also creates a severe "chilling effect" on the press. As argued in one of the writ 
petitions by The Reporters' Collective, journalists could be classified as "data fiduciaries" under the 
DPDP Act and its Rules when collecting information for investigative reports. Non-compliance with the 
Act can attract fines up to ₹250 crore. Such a legal framework threatens reducing journalism to just 
publishing government releases. It is ironic that the DPDP Act provides exemptions to startups but 
omits similar protections for journalism. This is in sharp contrast with the European Union's General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which balances privacy and transparency to ensure accountability. 
The Constitution Bench must refer to the judgment, Central Public Information Officer (2019), which held 
that personal information should remain private unless disclosure is necessary for the larger public 
interest. It is known that the RTI has significantly reduced state-citizen (this includes the poor) 
information asymmetry over two decades. Ensuring its survival is essential for a responsive 
government. 
O


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Diluting 
A. agreement 
2. Invasion 
B. unjustified 
3. Consent 
C. intrusion 
4. Asymmetry 
D. weakening 
5. Unwarranted 
E. imbalance 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Safety first: On Manipur and a healing touch 
Manipur needs a healing touch that cuts the cycle of violence 
f a bruised and bleeding Manipur wants to heal, the words of its first woman Deputy Chief 
Minister, Nemcha Kipgen, must be heard. She wants the buffer zones between the Meiteis and 
the Kuki-Zo communities to remain for now, particularly in areas where the scars run deep, 
because safety comes first. Hailing from the Kuki-Zo community, Ms. Kipgen had to take oath 
virtually from New Delhi when a new government was installed in the State capital, Imphal, on 
February 4, after two years of violence and a long stint of President's Rule. While Chief Minister 
Yumnam Khemchand Singh is a Meitei, in an attempt to represent the three major communities in the 
government, Ms. Kipgen and Losii Dikho, a Naga, were named Deputy Chief Ministers. But the 
complexity of the ground situation is such that Ms. Kipgen is stationed in Kuki-dominated Kangpokpi, 
and unable to attend the Assembly session in Imphal due to security concerns. In an interview to The 
Hindu, she described approaching the road to peace like a mother, with empathy and care. Her work is 
cut out because, at this juncture, there is an acute deficit of trust in the BJP government, and between 
the majority Meiteis, who dominate Imphal Valley, and the tribals, particularly the Kuki-Zo communities, 
of the hill districts. 
More than 250 people have been killed and around 60,000 people were displaced after ethnic violence 
between the Kuki-Zo and Meitei people erupted in the northeastern State on May 3, 2023. What is 
worrying is that skirmishes have begun between the Kuki-Zo and Nagas as well, with the Manipur police 
having to evacuate Kuki students from a school in Naga-dominated Ukhrul district after a recent flare-up 
between the communities. Manipur is no stranger to violence, having witnessed waves of insurgencies 
ever since it attained full Statehood in 1972, and the three main communities must find a way to peaceful 
coexistence in the geographical space they live in. Ms. Kipgen wants to hear each community's pain on 
their terms but she also drives home the point that every one must recognise the common ground that 
binds Manipuris - "our shared spaces, tribal heritage, cultural values, languages, faith traditions, social 
institutions, and our future, especially the future of our children". Harmony, she says, does not mean 
sameness; "it means respecting distinct identities while strengthening the bonds that allow us to live 
together". Her political masters too will do well to hear these words because the cycle of violence has to 
be broken. A rhetoric of hate has no winners. But first, Ms. Kipgen has to feel confident to travel to 
Imphal. 
I