Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 264

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Dispose 
A. unwilling 
2. Emphasized 
B. practical 
3. Loath 
C. dilemma 
4. Conundrum 
D. discard 
5. Pragmatic 
E. highlighted 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- B 

            Complex priorities: On UPI transactions, MDR charges 
A fear of political fallout has led to an overly complex MDR structure on UPI 
The Merchant Discount Rate (MDR) charges announced for UPI transactions show how 
political considerations can dilute economic benefits. In a quest to preempt political attacks, 
the rate structure announced by the National Payments Corporation of India has been made 
overly complex. From October 15, the new rates will apply only to UPI payments of ₹2,000 or 
more made at merchants. As such, the charge is limited to only about 2.5% of all UPI 
transactions, which is a welcome limitation. Yet, within this, the rules have created different gradations. 
UPI payments made at small merchants earning less than 1 lakh a month are exempt. Those made to 
merchants operating in certain essential sectors will attract a flat MDR charge instead of the 0.4% 
applicable on other sectors. Capital market payments above ₹2,000 will attract a different MDR. These 
are clearly designed keeping political backlash in mind. However, they raise some important doubts 
among merchants, and could potentially slow the adoption of UPI in India. For example, the rules are not 
clear on what happens to a small merchant who crosses the ₹1 lakh a month turnover threshold, which 
is a low limit at today's prices. Who is monitoring their incomes? This will either increase the compliance 
burden on small merchants, or involve a new mechanism for real-time transaction-checking that banks 
will have to develop. In the short run, it will likely result in small merchants simply refusing to accept UPI 
until greater clarity emerges. 
[A] The government has also [1]/ sure that merchants [2]/ instructed banks to make [3]/ do not pass on 
this [4]/ charge to customers [5]. But it has not specified how banks are expected to check whether 
merchants tweak their prices to absorb this additional charge. A back-of-the-envelope calculation 
based on past trends suggests that the MDR will yield an upper limit of ₹2,400 crore of monthly revenue 
for the payments ecosystem. The sector-wise flat rates and reduced rates will likely result in a lower 
amount. The government has denied any U.S. pressure to bring these rates to favour American credit 
card companies. Yet, the data suggest that the benefit will largely accrue to private banks and U.S.-
owned UPI apps. There is still an argument to be made for the Reserve Bank of India to foot this bill 
from the vast surpluses it generates every year. Maintaining vital payment infrastructure is surely a good 
use of these funds. However, if the government persists in implementing this charge, it should certainly 
simplify the structure. There is still time before its rollout. The Goods and Services Tax experience 
shows that rate complexity hits small businesses the hardest. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Threshold 
A. accumulate 
2. Rollout 
B. weaken 
3. Dilute 
C. limit 
4. Accrue 
D. huge 
5. Vast 
E. launch 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- B 
4- A 
5- D 

            Continental glory: On the Asian Games 2026 
India might get another 100-medal haul from a smaller contingent 
ven as Japan, known for efficiency, welcomes its third Asian Games and the first in 32 years, 
on Saturday, the Aichi-Nagoya Games have already earned the 'worst ever' tag because of 
accommodation and logistical issues. A country that successfully hosted two Olympics in 
1964, within two decades of suffering atomic bombings, and in 2021, behind closed doors 
amid the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic - is now strangely struggling to accommodate 
more than 17,000 athletes and officials from 45 nations in hotels, containers and a cruise ship. Despite 
these issues, 501 of India's athletes, including 267 men and 234 women, across 36 disciplines, will try 
to keep its flag flying high. At the previous Hangzhou Asiad, India had an impressive tally of 106 
medals and was placed fourth behind China, Japan and South Korea. There is a significant drop in the 
number of Indian athletes, from 650-plus in 40 disciplines three years ago, following rationalisation, 
discouraging a mad rush because of the perks and money associated with the Asiad. Nevertheless, 
Indian sports authorities expect around 100 medals, which may noticeably improve the athlete-to-medal 
ratio. 
The presence of 310 debutants in the contingent signals a brighter future for the country, which has 
spent nearly ₹800 crore on Asian Games preparations in the last cycle. Shooting and athletics, which 
together field 105 athletes, should continue to be the major contributors to India's medals tally, followed 
by archery, boxing, badminton, squash and wrestling. Stars including Manu Bhaker, Mirabai Chanu, 
Lovlina Borgohain, P.V. Sindhu, Aman Sehrawat, Tajinderpal Singh Toor, Gulveer Singh, Harmanpreet 
Singh, Smriti Mandhana and Jasprit Bumrah will lead India's campaign. At 39, squash player Joshna 
Chinappa will be the first Indian to compete in seven consecutive Asian Games. The youngest athlete, 
15-year-old cricketer Vaibhav Sooryavanshi, and the oldest, 55-year-old rider Shruti Vora, are the other 
attractions. Some attention will also be devoted to Indian men's and women's hockey teams, which will 
aim to win gold medals and secure berths at the 2028 Los Angeles Olympics. While India can take pride 
in fielding athletes in debut-making disciplines, such as mixed martial arts and teqball, it should ponder 
over its poor representation in swimming, gymnastics and cycling, which offer more medals and open 
avenues for Olympic glory. Meanwhile, the Indian men and women's teams would be watched closely in 
cricket. In pushing for continental excellence, India should also remain vigilant about its deteriorating 
global reputation due to the sharply rising doping graph. 
E