Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 224

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Contraction 
A. disclose 
2. Persist 
B. spiking 
3. Reveal 
C. shrinkage 
4. Surging 
D. portions 
5. Tranches 
E. continue 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Peace with peace: On preventive detentions 
Preventive detentions are misused by the state in the name of order 
In Chander Pal Singh, a matter involving preventive proceedings, the Allahabad High Court has 
simultaneously addressed a part of the criminal justice system that often receives less attention 
than ordinary criminal proceedings and the more overbearing reality of mechanisms designed to 
avert disturbances having gradually become instruments to deprive people of liberty. The state 
has the power to intervene before a crime occurs if it is reasonably apprehensive that a person is 
a threat to public order. However, it has acquired a habit of exercising that power routinely, resulting in 
detentions without any substantive criminal charge. The High Court's order was based, the Bench said, 
on a "highly irresponsible" deprivation of personal liberties in Uttar Pradesh, where police officers and 
executive magistrates were using preventive powers to incarcerate individuals on the basis of arguably 
minor apprehensions. In Chander Pal Singh as well, the petitioner, a physically challenged Dalit 
advocate, had been arrested over a petty dispute with a neighbour. The Bench said that between May 
2025 and April 2026, around 2,500 people were reportedly subjected to preventive detention 
proceedings in Ghaziabad, despite a 2021 State policy to guide the exercise of such powers. 
The guidelines in response are commendable; if implemented appropriately, they could reduce the use 
of preventive incarceration in neighbourhood and property disputes; require executive magistrates to 
justify their decisions; encourage constitutional challenges to unlawful preventive detention; and 
generate appellate scrutiny of the compensation framework. They may also snap at the heels of 
magistrates who cite unspecified "communal tensions" to jail protesters and who impose prohibitively 
unaffordable bonds for release. Further, even if the ruling does not directly impinge on the detention of 
activist Sonam Wangchuk under the NSA, it critiques the idea of using the excuse of maintaining peace 
to silence dissent and reminds the state that it still has a responsibility to maintain peace with peace. The 
ruling may also apply to workers and activists recently detained in New Delhi if held under Sections 126 
or 170 of the BNSS without valid grounds. That said, implementing the ruling will be difficult. The Bench 
said that compensation for unlawful detention can be recovered from the salary of the magistrate 
concerned and/or police officer following a disciplinary hearing. However, the executive has been 
historically reluctant to penalise its personnel. Second, executive magistrates are part of the State 
administration and their careers may depend on maintaining 'peace' as the State defines it. Addressing 
these barriers could reform preventive proceedings in India. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Substantive 
A. alone 
2. Resist 
B. government 
3. Isolated 
C. feasible 
4. Viable 
D. significant 
5. Regime 
E. oppose 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- B 

            Innovate or be eaten: On India and an innovative ecosystem 
India must realise the importance of innovating up to the frontier 
here is no question that Indian professionals are capable of pathbreaking innovation. As 
evidenced by the strong representation of Indian and Indian-origin technology industry 
leaders, Indian executives have displayed extraordinary talent in both the managerial and 
technical work that goes into building and advancing complex businesses at the forefront of 
the global economy's most important engines. 'Bharat Innovates 2026', the event in Nice, 
France, supported by the Ministry of Education, has shown that many of these innovations are possible 
in India, and that patient incubation of startups in key strategic areas can lead to exceptional results 
that are competitive with the best-in-class globally. India's potential to be a global home for innovation is 
real, especially with the kind of middle power collaboration that French President Emmanuel Macron 
advocated for at the event. The innovation question is key to processing the aftermath of Anthropic's 
most powerful AI models, Claude Mythos and Fable, being banned for non-Americans, a move that has 
already affected some Indian entities and users. 
Perhaps it is not possible to brute-force frontier AI or semiconductor technology, given the tens of billions 
of dollars even a single player requires to make incremental advances in these fields. Becoming an AI 
deployment superpower, as many tech policymakers advocate, may also be a pursuit of a losing 
battle; India, after all, is not alone in seeking knowledge economy efficiencies from AI. But the field of 
opportunities remains nonetheless vast: deep tech in areas such as space exploration, defence, and 
even material sciences remain an open contest. For India to pursue innovation, two ingredients are 
important: India must be a stable and attractive home for capital and talent. For the former, the 
swashbuckling rent-seeking of the successful must be reined in to keep innovators from dreading 
success on Indian soil; venture capital must be in a position to assess exploratory and cutting-edge 
pitches on the same footing as they do in other countries; and tax policies must be clear and 
predictable. To be an attractive home for talent, what is required is quite simple: the top talent must look 
forward to their future in India, instead of running into a dead end for their potential and the life they feel 
greener pastures may afford them. For this, investments in public goods such as clean air, abundant 
urban green spaces, and affordable and reliable public transport can go a long way. These are, after all, 
what returnees miss the most. Some of India's oldest and most stubborn problems are in the way of a 
truly innovative ecosystem. The good news is that these problems need political capital, not risk capital. 
T