Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 226

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Nuisance 
A. defined 
2. Curtailed 
B. ignored 
3. Demarcated 
C. reduced 
4. Gentrify 
D. renovate 
5. Overlooked 
E. irritation 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- A 
4- D 
5- B 

            Just truths: On DNA evidence and rights 
DNA test for paternity, allowed as a last resort, must not violate other rights 
o protect children from the stigma of illegitimacy, the erstwhile Indian Evidence Act 1872 and 
the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 place the burden of proof on the party denying 
paternity rather than the party seeking confirmation. The Supreme Court of India first 
considered the challenges posed by DNA evidence in this regard, in Goutam Kundu (1993), 
where it held that DNA tests could not be ordered as a matter of routine and that courts must 
first assess whether a strong prima facie case had been made out. It reiterated this position in Shri 
Banarsi Dass (2005); both cases also reinforced the protection of legitimacy over any interest in 
forensic curiosity. Then, in the litigation mooted by Rohit Shekhar alleging that veteran politician N.D. 
Tiwari was his father, the Delhi High Court and the top court called for the test despite Mr. Tiwari 
insisting that his right to privacy was being violated. In Nandlal Wasudeo Badwaik (2014), the Court 
said that when reliable scientific proof confronts legal fiction, the former may prevail in the interest of 
justice; in Dipanwita Roy (2014), it acknowledged that refusing testing can lead to adverse inference. 
Both orders also confirmed the legitimacy of DNA tests based on need. 
Then, in K.S. Puttaswamy (2017), as it encoded the right to privacy - including of genetic data - as a 
fundamental right under Article 21, the Court introduced a constraint that prior paternity jurisprudence 
did not have to reckon with. The threefold test it set up, of legality, legitimate aims, and proportionality, 
was brought to bear in Aparna Ajinkya Firodia (2023), which concluded that DNA tests should be 
ordered only where they are necessary and proportionate, and not if a dispute could be resolved based 
on other evidence. In Ivan Rathinam (2025), the Court said neither privacy nor knowledge were absolute 
and that the judiciary also has to negotiate stigma and necessity. Its order in CP vs AP (2026) tied all 
these contentions together as it upheld a trial court's direction for a DNA test on the grounds that the 
disputed question of paternity could not be resolved by the existing material record and required a 
scientific determination, by applying necessity and proportionality considerations. In the post-
Puttaswamy era, then, the Constitution protects bodily autonomy and restricts compelled genetic 
disclosure - but courts could order a DNA test if paternity is directly in issue, there is no other evidence 
on record capable of resolving the question, and the test would serve the interest of justice. Thus, by 
positioning DNA testing as a last resort, the courts have to ensure that while science may be infallible, 
the pursuit of truth is only just when it respects a person's rights. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Reliable 
A. repeated 
2. Mooted 
B. flawless 
3. Disclosure 
C. dependable 
4. Reiterated 
D. proposed 
5. Infallible 
E. revelation 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- A 
5- B 

            Stay with the evidence: On the ban on Fixed Dose Combination drugs 
Better monitoring of sale of banned drugs is essential 
The character of science leans to openness: to new evidence and emerging facts. Its ability to 
be agile to pivot and shift to newer guidelines is therefore absolutely crucial. The Health 
Ministry's recent ban on 16 Fixed Dose Combination (FDC) drugs comes on the evidence that 
these drug combinations lack therapeutic justification, are 'deemed irrational or unsafe' and 
might pose risks to patients. The drugs include dermatological drugs, analgesics and 
antispasmodics, and antibiotic-based formulations. An FDC is a drug containing two or more active 
pharmacological ingredients, combined in a fixed ratio in a single dosage. These were meant to improve 
treatment compliance in chronic conditions (such as Tuberculosis) by reducing the pill burden and, 
sometimes, by improved therapeutic effectiveness. However, irrational combinations, besides being 
ineffective, can also be counter-productive and harmful. As per the latest order, all State Drug 
Controllers, regulatory authorities, and enforcement agencies are to ensure strict implementation and 
compliance with the recent notification. Instructions must also be sent to manufacturers, importers, 
distributors, and even individual pharmacies, to stop stocking and selling the banned FDCs. 
This is not the first time that the Health Ministry is cracking down on FDCs. A detailed scientific review 
is undertaken before these decisions to ban FDCs are taken. In March 2016, the government banned a 
whopping number of over 330 FDC drugs, on the ground that they were irrational, with immediate effect. 
While FDCs offer the advantage of a reduction in the number of pills, of certain benefit to certain 
categories of patients, there are some innate issues as well: patients might need different titrations of 
doses, impossible with FDCs; patients might develop allergies, but it will not be clear what particular 
pharmaceutical ingredient they are reacting to. It is also clear that all patients may not actually need all 
the drugs in the combination, exposing them to unnecessary side effects. A further potential harm exists 
with FDCs of antibiotics: In 2016, 19% of the 330 FDCs banned were antibiotics; There is enough 
evidence to show that irrational antibiotic FDC drug usage leads to or exacerbates the growing 
antimicrobial resistance problem in the country. While the government has taken a positive step with 
banning these FDCs, its work has just begun. In many instances in the past, stocks of banned drugs 
were still being sold in pharmacies, because the message had not percolated down. While staying 
solidly on the side of evidence-based medicine, the government must also activate its monitoring and 
supervision arm in order to ensure that the benefits from the ban reach the last mile. 
T