Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 212

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Confined 
A. infectious 
2. Feted 
B. eagerness 
3. Contagious 
C. limited 
4. Solicited 
D. celebrated 
5. Alacrity 
E. requested 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Measure for measure: On India's courts and criticism 
Courts should not react defensively to every line of criticism 
hile it is the courts' prerogative to punish contempt, how well they have separated 
contemptuous attacks from constitutionally protected criticism, especially by 
journalists, lawyers, activists, and scholars, has varied widely. This is because the 
judiciary has not been able to draw consistent lines between fair and exaggerated 
criticism, politically motivated and defamatory comments, and speech that obstructs 
justice. The judiciary faces misinformation, political pressure, abusive online discourse, and declining public 
trust, and the waysin which judges can respond to these attacks arelimited. Rhetorical excessin oral 
observations mustalso not be confused with legal doctrine. However, recent commentsby the Bench 
havecreated the appearance of a judiciary increasingly intolerant of external scrutiny. Last week, when 
hearing a lawyer's petition over not having been elevated to a senior rank, CJI Surya Kant described 
certain actors in the legal ecosystem as "parasites" and certain young lawyers engaging in RTI-based 
activism as "cockroaches". While he later said the remarks were directed at persons entering professions 
with bogus degrees, rather than critics of the judiciary, such language is unbecoming of the CJI. The tenor 
follows the NCERT textbook controversy, with the Supreme Court focusing its manifestire on three 
academics involved in drafting the chapter, effectively excluding them from work on public school 
curricula without prior hearing. The action evoked concerns about the Court being aggrieved party and 
arbiter. In the Ali Khan Mahmudabad matter, the Court granted him relief from coercive action but also 
imposed a gag order. Then, in a display of willingness to discipline the norms of public conduct rather 
than determine legality, it urged the state to decline to prosecute him as a concession. 
When a CJI's comments of this nature appear outside formal contempt proceedings, they render a chilling 
effect as they amount to institutional condemnation without the safeguards of due process. The 
commentson using the RTI Act as a basis for activism havea similar effect, beyond the Act being a 
legitimate instrument. Recently, when a journalist (with a law degree) sought data on complaints against 
specific judges, the Supreme Court Registry declined the existence of such information. When the 
journalist produced a Law Ministry disclosure to the contrary, the Registry's legal representative dubbed 
the inquiry "fishing and roving" - a moving goalpost that was, again, under-concerned with legality while 
raising questions of the Court arguing its own case. Former CJI D.Y. Chandrachud said that judges are 
public actors exercising state power and courts should not react defensively to every line of criticism. That 
attitude improved how the bar, the press, and the academy experienced courts. The recent comments 
have set the clock back. 
W

             The red and blue coloring of words in the sentence highlights the subject-verb relationship, with 
'red' representing the 'subject' and 'blue' indicating the 'verb'.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Conceived 
A. weakness 
2. Austerity 
B. raised 
3. Hiked 
C. disclose 
4. Vulnerability 
D. devised 
5. Reveal 
E. thrift 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- B 
4- A 
5- C 

            Watch, but do not wait: On the Ebola outbreak 
Extra caution should guide international responses to Ebola outbreak 
ith unusualalacrity, WHO declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern 
over the Ebola outbreak in central Africa, not even waiting for the advice of an 
emergency committee of expert panellists, as is convention. WHO has nevertheless 
been feted for swift action by global health experts, given that there are several 
unknowns arising from the current strain responsible for the outbreak - the 
uncommon Bundibugyo strain. This strain has caused fewer outbreaks in the past and the efficacy of 
usually effective countermeasures such as vaccines (highly effective against the common Zaire strain) and 
other therapies, are currently untested with Bundibugyo. The new Ebola outbreak was notified in the 
eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Uganda. It is said to be smaller and confined to a 
limited cross-border region between the two nations, but there are still concerns that because of the 
ongoing conflict and displacement in the region, cases might go undetected, leading to a spread, and 
impairing access to care. According to WHO, as on May 16, 2026, eight laboratory-confirmed cases, 246 
suspected cases, and 80 suspected deaths have been reported in the DRC's Ituri province. Two lab-
confirmed cases (including one death) with no apparent link to each other have been reported in 
Kampala, Uganda. WHO has listed a clutch of factors - high positivity rate of the initial samples (eight 
positives among 13 samples); the confirmation of cases in Kampala; increasing trends in syndromic 
reporting of suspected cases; and clusters of deaths across Ituri province - that point towards a 
potentially much larger outbreak than what is being detected. 
At any rate, WHO has rightly taken a risk-averse pathway, when dealing with a condition that has a 50% 
fatality rate. While it says that mortality rates can range between 25% and 50% depending on the viral 
strain, access to medical care, and speed of treatment, there are unknowns this time arising out of the 
Bundibugyo strain. Ebola is contagious, can spread from person to person, with exposure to body fluids 
and contaminated surfaces, and can be vicious; the horrific 2014-16 outbreakwhich swept across Guinea, 
Liberia, and Sierra Leone, resultedin over 28,600 reported cases and 11,325 deaths. By issuing the highest 
level of global alert early on, WHO has solicited the co-operation of the world in handling the crises. 
Outbreak control activities at this stage must unfailingly include effective patient and contact tracing, 
intensive support for every patient, safe and dignified burials, vaccinations, if they work, and social 
mobilisation to spread information about the disease among the public. 
 The red and blue coloring of words in the sentence highlights the subject-verb relationship, with 
'red' representing the 'subject' and 'blue' indicating the 'verb'. 
W