Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 129

Changing the frame: On India, forecasting and natural events 
India must use forecast to better prepare for calamities 
India received 8% more monsoon rain this year than normal. From a bird's eye view, this is 
bountiful. Official numbers suggest that the total area sown under kharif crops, until mid-
September, increased by around 15 lakh hectares to about 1,110 lakh hectares. Rice cultivation 
has seen significant growth of over 8.45 lakh hectares to over 438 lakh hectares, compared to 430 
lakh hectares during the same period last year. Pulses, coarse cereals and oilseeds have shown 
similar trends. In India's main reservoirs, the total available water capacity is, as of late September, 
163 BCM (billion cubic metres) up from the 157.8 BCM last year. 1 BCM is trillion litres. However, 
torrential rains, particularly in August and September, saw several districts in Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab inundated - even cut off - after swollen rivers breached their flood 
marks. In Punjab, entire villages have been inundated, sinking farmland. While not a story unique to this 
year, there have been several landslides and flooding (urban and rural). Land erosion and siltation 
were widespread across the country leading to colossal damage. 
Seasonal rainfall over northwest India, central India and the south peninsula were 27%, 15% and 10% 
more than their seasonal averages. In several instances, there were reports of 'cloudburst' - in 
meteorological terms, a very specific definition when State officials reported a deluge. Only in a single 
instance, in Tamil Nadu, did this actually bear out. While technical definitions might appear as a quibble, 
they influence the public perception of such events. A 'cloudburst' suggests something that is 
exceedingly rare and unforeseen, whose brunt must only be borne. On the other hand, even terms such 
as 'normal' rainfall - even though their visible impact can be, frequently, as damaging - also tend to 
convey fait accompli. A resignation to fate. Since April, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) has 
consistently pointed to seasonal rainfall being "above normal" or at least 4% more than the long period 
average of 87 cm as per its forecast. Whenever its figures bear out, it is framed as a victory of 
forecasting and less a failure of adequately preparing for calamity. While the establishment has forever 
been psychologically primed to treat a warning of drought as worth bracing for on a 'war footing', excess 
rains are seen as natural munificence. With developments in forecasting technology and the know-how 
to improve infrastructure, it is high time that this framing is modified. Failure to do so ought to be seen as 
an abdication of the government's responsibility to the public.


Marshland trap: on Sir Creek, Pakistan's activities 
India must address its concerns about Pakistan's activities with care 
lluding to intelligence reports of Pakistan's heavy military activity in areas adjoining Sir 
Creek, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh has warned Pakistan against any adventurism. Mr. 
Singh's statement that "a route to Karachi passes through Sir Creek" is both puzzling and 
disconcerting, considering the lingering tensions and the absence of diplomacy between 
India and Pakistan. His remarks drew a parallel with the 1965 India-Pakistan war, when the 
Indian Army advanced to the outskirts of Lahore. Sir Creek is an uninhabited, largely 
inaccessible marshland between Gujarat and Sindh in Pakistan, with a complex web of 
waterways and shifting tidal patterns. It remains a dispute between the two countries. Navigation is 
extremely challenging and requires expert knowledge of the terrain. On the Indian side, the estuarine 
region is already under layered security, with the Border Security Force, the Indian Army, the Indian 
Coast Guard and the Indian Air Force maintaining a strong presence. India considers the area as vital for 
oil and gas exploration as well as fishing rights. India's major ports, Mundra and Kandla, located in the 
Gulf of Kutch, are also in close vicinity. Large-scale ground operations are nearly impossible in the 
region, which lacks roads, a civilian population and administrative infrastructure. However, during 
Operation Sindoor, Pakistan attempted to strike military infrastructure with close to 400 drones across 36 
locations from Leh to Sir Creek. Indian forces neutralized many of them, but it perhaps signalled the 
expansion of the front between the two countries. 
Strategically, opening a front here is disadvantageous for both sides, but conflicts often do not follow 
reason or logic. Mr. Singh, who was in Kutch to celebrate Vijayadashami with soldiers, had been 
scheduled to visit Sir Creek but could not due to adverse weather. Addressing troops at the Bhuj 
military base, he reiterated India's consistent position to resolve the issue through dialogue. He said 
Pakistan's intentions remain unclear, and went on to say that "any aggression by Pakistan in the Sir 
Creek area will be met with a resounding response that will change both history and geography". Adding 
to India's security concerns are Chinese-backed mining and power projects in the Pakistani part of the 
Rann of Kutch, near Gujarat. These projects, India fears, could evolve into a strategic-military challenge, 
if leveraged jointly by Beijing and Islamabad. Considering the volatility in geopolitical situations in many 
corners of the world, India must tread with care and wisdom. Strategy should be disconnected from 
domestic politics. New Delhi must do everything under its command - but first, diplomacy - to address 
its security concerns.