Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 238

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Tentalising 
A. impending 
2. Massive 
B. tempting 
3. Boom 
C. distributed 
4. Disbursed 
D. surge 
5. Looming 
E. huge 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- D 
4- C 
5- A 

            Spreading wings: On the Vikram-1 launch 
Vikram-1 is an engineering triumph seeking commercial viability 
The launch of the Vikram-1 rocket built by Skyroot Aerospace from Sriharikota marked the 
Indian private sector's first orbital flight. Vikram-1 is a four-stage launcher designed to provide 
what Skyroot has called a "cab service" for satellites, letting customers pick their orbit and 
launch schedule rather than accept the orbital slot and drop-off point presented by rideshares, 
at a commensurate premium. Skyroot is targeting a price per launch below that of the PSLV 
and above that of the SSLV (projected), to be achieved in part by basing the rocket on carbon-composite 
structures. It also has plans for a more powerful Vikram-2 rocket. The company was founded in 2018 by 
two former ISRO engineers and its path to orbit followed engine tests in 2020 and a suborbital flight in 
2022. For roughly six decades, ISRO held a state monopoly over launch activities in India while private 
firms were limited to being suppliers. Reforms since 2020 and the 2023 Space Policy opened the door 
for commercial players and freed ISRO to focus on R&D and scientific missions. In 2024, up to 49% FDI 
in launch vehicles was allowed by the automatic route. The push is also part of the government's 
ambition of growing the national space economy to $44 billion by 2033 from around $8 billion alongside 
satellite manufacturing, communications, navigation, and earth observation. 
Orbital launch capability remains hard-won: India is now only the third country to host private enterprise 
that has demonstrated it. But now that Skyroot has proved competence in engineering, its next 
milestone is commercial viability, which may be harder. Specifically, the company has to demonstrate 
repeatability and stable launch costs in an increasingly crowded suppliers' market that includes 
established 'brands' such as SpaceX and Rocket Lab and a bevy of rapidly scaling Chinese firms. 
Rideshares on larger rockets are still often cheaper per kilogram to orbit. The model Skyroot is betting 
on, letting customers specify orbit and schedule in return for a premium over a rideshare launch, 
depends on a market of uncertain size. The greater production scale will challenge the engineering, too, 
as batch-to-batch variability becomes harder to control. India also lacks a Space Activities Act, leaving 
liability to be governed by policy, contracts, existing law, and international commitments rather than 
statute, maintaining long-term regulatory uncertainty, particularly in the event of a launch or orbital 
mishap. The Vikram-1 launch is an engineering triumph. Whether it translates to commercial success, 
which is the real national ambition, is now the question. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Triumph 
A. steady 
2. Demonstrated 
B. group 
3. Stable 
C. showed 
4. Bevy 
D. calamity 
5. Mishap 
E. victory 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Press and play: On the FIFA World Cup 2026 
Spain smothered the opposition with possession and positional football 
pain's second World Cup title, achieved after a narrow extra-time victory over Argentina in 
the final, was a triumph of the collective. The Luis de la Fuente-coached outfit conceded just 
one goal in eight matches, was unmatched in the centre of the pitch with playmaker and 
Golden Ball winner Rodri completing a record 790 passes, and exhibited diffused excellence 
up front by having seven different players score its 14 goals. So much so that even the 
individual brilliance of the teenaged Lamine Yamal was astutely subsumed within the whole. In fact, de 
la Fuente and Rodri had combined to deliver the 2024 European Championship too, with the latter 
adjudged the world's best later that year. A second Ballon d'Or for the 30-year-old midfield metronome 
appears a certainty. The win also cemented Spain's position as the pre-eminent footballing force of the 
first quarter of this century. Starting 2008, the country has won two of the five World Cups and three of 
the five Euros. Spain is the reigning women's World Champion, and the assembly line of coaches it 
produces and players it exports make the nation a true powerhouse. Interestingly, after its maiden World 
Cup win in 2010, Spain had not gone past the round of 16 at three subsequent editions. The success in 
North America is thus a full-circle moment. 
Another high point for the tournament was Lionel Messi's enduring genius. Argentina's quality in the 
final was dire and the behaviour of its players petulant, but that should not detract from the 39-year-
old's excellence in bringing his country to the cusp of defending its crown. Kylian Mbappe's experience 
was bitter-sweet; he won the Golden Boot (10 goals) and became the all-time top-scorer in World Cups 
(22) but remained a mute spectator as Spain subjugated his star-studded France in the semifinal. [P] 
Jude Bellingham [A] performance England to third place, the best [B] inspired for the [C] nation since 
[D] winning in 1966. But the summer sojourn laid bare the team's continued lack of cutting edge after 
back-to-back runner-up finishes at Euro 2020 and 2024. The World Cup will also be etched in memory 
for a plethora of missteps, which governing body FIFA unfortunately condoned. By arbitrarily invoking 
immigration rules, and trying to interfere politically in on-field matters, the co-host U.S. pushed the 
envelope in undesirable ways. Commercially driven hydration breaks and the half-time show in the final 
were tedious and disruptive. Football should be allowed to flow freely, on and off the turf. 
S