Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 242

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Investigate 
A. allegedly 
2. Accused 
B. blamed 
3. Supposedly 
C. drastically 
4. Levied 
D. examine 
5. Radically 
E. imposed 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- B 
3- A 
4- E 
5- C 

            Diminishing relevance: On the Commonwealth Games 
The Commonwealth Games look increasingly like a relic from the past 
s Olympic and World Championships medallist Mirabai Chanu stood atop the podium in 
Glasgow on Sunday, tears rolling down her cheeks after becoming the first woman 
weightlifter to secure her third consecutive Commonwealth Games gold medal, she 
provided much-needed succour to a Games that had risked fading into oblivion a few 
years ago. With India set to host the centenary edition of the Games in Ahmedabad in 2030, 
there could not have been a better advertisement than Mirabai's golden triumph, which also ensured her 
fourth medal of any colour in a row in the women's 48kg category with a total of 190kg. The seasoned 
weightlifter's feat may not be the only glorious chapter written in the Scottish city, as other leading 
Indian athletes are expected to climb the podium in athletics and para-athletics, weightlifting and para-
weightlifting, boxing, judo, and lawn bowls and para-bowls. According to an internal estimation by the 
Union Sports Ministry, India's athletes are expected to win around 30 medals even though several 
disciplines in which Indians have traditionally excelled - such as wrestling, badminton, table tennis, 
hockey and squash - were dropped from the scaled-down Glasgow event. Medals are expected from 
Neeraj Chopra, Murali Sreeshankar, Praveen Chithravel, and boxers Lovlina Borgohain and Jaismine 
Lamboria. 
The curtailed Commonwealth Games highlights the diminishing relevance of the erstwhile British 
Empire's sporting tradition. The 2026 edition, originally allotted to Victoria, faced an existential threat 
after the Australian State withdrew as a host three years ago due to spiralling costs. Glasgow, the host 
in 2014, saved the Games from embarrassment by proposing a scaled-down version - with 10 
integrated disciplines, across four venues within an eight-mile corridor. Even though the Commonwealth 
Games do not match the global or regional excellence of the Olympics or the Asian Games, the platform 
still holds a strong appeal for Indian sportspersons and administrators. While India's success at the 
elite world level across different sports has been sporadic, it has the dubious distinction of topping 
the global doping charts for three successive years. Multiple athletes across disciplines have been 
caught for consuming banned substances even in the run-up to Glasgow 2026. Either they have been 
withdrawn from the Indian contingent or have failed to qualify due to this, impacting the nation's medal 
chances and bringing it shameful international headlines. As the country prepares to organise a bigger 
Commonwealth Games - especially against the backdrop of the corruption-tainted Delhi 2010 edition 
- it would do well to enhance its vigilance to curb financial malpractices and promote clean sport over 
the next four years. 
A


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Succour 
A. achievement 
2. Relic 
B. aid 
3. Glorious 
C. success 
4. Triumph 
D. remnant 
5. Feat 
E. splendid 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- E 
4- C 
5- A 

            Hiding the scissors: On the Central Board of Film Certification 
The censor board has strayed from the law that underpins its existence 
The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) wields significant cultural influence by deciding 
which films can be screened in Indian cinemas. Its decisions on what to excise from Indian 
films are followed nearly completely even by streaming services, despite not being required to 
show the censor's version of a filmmaker's artistic vision. The patterns that producers 
interpret from the CBFC's decisions determine which stories are even made. There is a 
reason why few political films that espouse the cause of secularism (or the ills of communalism) are 
seen in cinemas today. There is also a reason why few would dare to make a film such as Satluj, 
considering what it went through at the censors' hands, and the fate it was met with when an online 
release was briefly achieved. The censor board stands captured, blocking off films that are 
inconvenient to the ruling dispensation in ways that have never been seen before, and purging 
politics hostile to the dominant philosophy from films. All this to say, what the CBFC does matters, and 
the only check on its authority is the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and the rules framed thereunder, but its 
autonomy is only on paper. 
The CBFC is required to watch and rule on films in a matter of weeks. For over a year, the film Monkey 
Man, featuring a dystopian vision of a society with supremacy baked in, has not even been watched. 
This amounts to a de facto ban, but the CBFC has chosen the route of avoiding that headline by simply 
not taking a call one way or the other. Even background references to the government's inaction during 
the COVID-19 pandemic were removed from Homebound, India's entry to the Oscars. The CBFC is also 
guilty of unlawful concealment. In plain defiance of Section 5A(2) of the Cinematograph Act, the board 
has stopped publishing certificates in the government Gazette. In addition, it has now placed the online 
details of its certificates with cuts - unindexed and difficult to obtain as they are - behind an "under 
maintenance" message. Archives have stopped receiving cut portions of films for researchers' study. 
Pre-censorship as a concept is odious to free societies, and the CBFC's role ought to be curtailed, if 
not abolished altogether. [P] While it exists, however, the CBFC must be [1] compelled by the film [2] 
fraternity, and its founding [3] statut, to follow the law. The censor's scissors have plagued and stifled 
the voice of generations of storytellers, but the dynamic this has played out in has been visible and 
must be held accountable.