Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 258

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Erratic 
A. hinted 
2. Collapsed 
B. terminated 
3. Exhausted 
C. crumbled 
4. Abolished 
D. irregular 
5. Alluded 
E. fatigued 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Forging consensus: On India and the SCO meeting 
India must broaden engagement with regional multilateral groups 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's attendance at the annual meeting of Shanghai Cooperation 
Organisation (SCO) leaders in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, marking 25 years of the Eurasian 
grouping, had a multipronged agenda. This was an occasion to meet his counterparts, for 
the first time since the U.S.-Israel war on Iran began more than six months ago, which has 
inflicted economic costs on the whole grouping. The grouping includes Iran, as well as 
Pakistan that has emerged a mediator between Iran and the U.S., and the Bishkek declaration that 
condemned the U.S. and Israel's attacks on Iran and supported Iran's right to peaceful nuclear 
technology under the NPT, was significant. Many of the SCO members are also in the BRICS grouping 
who Mr. Modi will host in Delhi on September 12-13- this includes Russian President Vladimir Putin, 
Chinese President Xi Jinping and Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian. New Delhi is keen to forge 
consensus on a joint declaration, which has been difficult due to UAE-Iran tensions and Mr. Modi's 
discussions with Mr. Pezeshkian included BRICS cooperation. India's ties with the Central Asian 
Republics have flagged due to other preoccupations, making Mr. Modi's visits to Tashkent and Bishkek, 
and meetings with regional leaders this time, an important initiative to revive talks on trade, critical 
minerals, tourism and other areas. As Pakistan takes over the SCO chairmanship, the Bishkek Summit 
allowed Mr. Modi to set out India's agenda for the coming year. His speech at the Summit focused on 
the importance of dismantling the ecosystem of "terrorist financing, recruitment, radicalisation, and safe 
havens", calling on the SCO to eschew "double standards" on terrorism. He also pressed for a strong 
message to countries that "use terrorism as an instrument of policy and provide safe haven and support 
to terrorists" - a pointed reference to India's oft-repeated concerns about Pakistan. The Bishkek 
declaration's inclusion of strong language on "all forms" of terrorism, including cross-border, has thus 
been welcomed by New Delhi. It remains to be seen how far the Pakistan presidency will take these 
ideas forward. 
Compared to the high-octane optics and the Modi-Putin-Xi handshake at the 2025 Tianjin SCO Summit, 
this year's summit was relatively sombre. The U.S.'s tariffs, its war with Iran and sanctions on Russia 
have damaged economic security, energy security and connectivity (the Hormuz Strait blockade), and 
pose major challenges to the grouping. For India, after tensions with Pakistan had peaked last year after 
the Pahalgam attacks and the four-day conflict, the past year has been sobering, given Pakistan's 
diplomatic forays with the U.S., and the new security pact with Saudi Arabia and Türkiye. In the altered 
P

            geopolitical framing, India must seek to broaden its engagement with all regional multilateral 
organisations such as the SCO.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Broaden 
A. criticized 
2. Condemned 
B. imposed 
3. Keen 
C. avoid 
4. Eschew 
D. expand 
5. Inflicted 
E. eager 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- C 
5- B 

            Warning on warming: On the UNEP report, Limiting Overshoot 
India must shed its victim mindset while acting on climate change 
The United Nations Environment Programme's report, Limiting Overshoot, is a reminder that 
breaching the 1.5°C global warming limit would bring irreversible losses that adaptation 
cannot undo. Were all countries to deliver on their climate pledges today, the globe is still 
poised to heat 1.8°C and on current policies, 2.6°C. Given that the limit has already been 
breached - and, with the ongoing heating in the central equatorial Pacific expected to burgeon 
into one of the strongest El Ninos in recent history, likely again in 2027 - the report is an acceptance of 
the scientific reality that we are in a 1.5°C world, while resisting the conclusion that nothing more can be 
done. The authors describe an "overshoot, peak and decline" pathway under which average global 
temperatures rise above 1.5°C but countries collectively hold the peak as low as possible and then bring 
them back below the limit by the end of the century. Neutralising the heating effect of even a tenth of a 
degree, the report argues, is far harder than preventing that rise in the first place. This in itself is nothing 
new. What is new is the emphasis on greenhouse gases beyond carbon dioxide. Action on methane, 
responsible for about 0.5°C of current warming, is considered the most effective way to slow warming in 
the near-term. Over 155 countries - India is not among them - have joined the Global Methane Pledge 
to cut anthropogenic methane at least 30% below 2020 levels by 2030. 
That absence reflects the familiar tension between reports of this nature, which emphasise mitigation, 
and major developing economies such as India. They stress that they are already en route to moving 
away from fossil fuels and, being vulnerable to the impacts of historical stocks of carbon, deserve 
greater financial support and affordable technology from richer developed countries responsible for the 
crisis. The latest report unfortunately has little to say on adaptation finance, though there are previous 
assessments on the topic. With countries set to convene in Turkiye in November for COP31, familiar 
disagreements are likely to surface - but in the aftermath of the Bhotekoshi disaster in Nepal, India's 
position too has been complicated. Nepal's Foreign Affairs Minister, Shisir Khanal, has said that major 
industrial emitters such as China, the United States and India must consider the impact of rising 
temperatures on small countries such as Nepal. For India, this list means that a section of the world - 
despite India's position as a victim of climate change with below-world-average per capita emissions - 
sees it as part of the problem. India must take such perceptions seriously and, rather than ignore the 
reality of a 1.5°C world, should calibrate its messaging to adapt to it. 
T