Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 185

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Implications 
A. effects 
2. Simultaneously 
B. unstable 
3. Volatile 
C. practical 
4. Realistic 
D. concurrently 
5. Pegged 
E. fixed 
Answer: 
1-A 
2- D 
3- B 
4- C 
5- E 

            Hot air: On Donald Trump and environmental issues 
Donald Trump is trying to turn back the clock on environmental issues 
s part of his continuing assault on science, U.S. President Donald Trump revoked a 
foundational guideline of the American environment regulator that allowed it to control the 
transportation sector's emission of greenhouse gases. The repeal of the 'endangerment 
finding' was the final, formal blow following a series of actions by the U.S.'s Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) in weakening Obama-era administration fuel economy and 
greenhouse gas (GHG) standards for vehicle model years 2021-26 and loosening fuel efficiency norms. 
The 'endangerment finding' emerged after the U.S. Supreme Court's 2007 decision, in Massachusetts 
vs EPA, which held that greenhouse gases qualify as "air pollutants" and required the EPA to determine 
whether they endanger public health or welfare. In December 2009, the EPA concluded that six 
greenhouse gases - including carbon dioxide and methane - "may reasonably be anticipated to 
endanger" health and welfare, drawing heavily on assessments by the IPCC and U.S. scientific bodies. 
The EPA's action had a seismic impact on the American automotive industry, setting in motion the first 
federal greenhouse gas standards, set in 2010, for cars and light trucks (2012-16), later extended 
through 2025. Manufacturers accelerated fuel-efficiency improvements, invested in hybrid systems, 
lightweight materials, and, eventually, battery-electric vehicles. Regulatory credit markets emerged, 
benefiting firms such as Tesla, Inc. and resulting in the popularity of electric vehicles globally, including in 
India. 
Though indirect, the stricter greenhouse gas emission norms also influenced a world-wide shift away 
from the 'small car' to the mid-sized Sport Utility Vehicles (SUV) with car markers improving the SUV's 
emissions profile. Mr. Trump seems to believe that doing away with the EPA regulations will revive 
America's 'gas guzzler' era, boost American manufacturing jobs, and somehow tie in with his 
administration's rediscovery of Venezuelan oil. These are pipedreams. Auto-manufacturing production 
lines today are ______________ around electrification, hybridisation and emissions controls. With 
China dominating most of the production value chain, it is unlikely that auto-manufacturers, who have 
invested over a multi-decadal horizon into clean vehicles - and with the intention to export to countries 
where emissions norms are only getting stricter by the day - will change tack to a regress. [A1] At 
best, the norms will be a speed [P] bump to electric vehicle [Q] rollout and could win Mr. Trump some 
[R] brownie points with his voter base. The real danger lies in automakers in India citing such regulation 
as a pretext to weaken fuel efficiency standards. [P1] Although India's standards do not [A]/ yet 
A

            connected climate goals with [B]/ cars, the domestic automotive sector [C]/ should view them as a 
lodestar [D].


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Emerged 
A. excuse 
2. Bump 
B. decline 
3. Regress 
C. appeared 
4. Pretext 
D. consumer 
5. Guzzler 
E. hurdle 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- B 
4- A 
5- D 

            Cities of debt: On the Urban Challenge Fund 
ULBs need more administrative capacity before they can tap the market 
The government's updated 'Urban Challenge Fund' has rendered the attention of urban local 
bodies (ULB) an even more precious resource as they struggle to complete unfinished work 
under other schemes, including AMRUT, Swachh Bharat Mission Urban 2.0, 'Smart Cities', 
and Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, which also suffer from chronic underutilization. The 
government has pitched the fund as a move towards "market-linked, reform-driven and 
outcome-oriented" urban infrastructure, with the Centre covering 25% of project cost if cities raise at 
least 50% through bonds, loans, and PPPs. This is an attempt to incorporate fiscal discipline in a system 
that has never properly devolved fiscal powers to ULBs. Many Indian cities cannot credibly borrow 
without first fixing the political economy of local taxes and transfers, which are shaped by State-level 
issues and under-investment in municipal capacity. Requiring cities to "earn" their growth risks 
sidelining weaker ones and shifting the focus from services such as formalising settlements to 
developing monetisable assets. The ₹5,000 crore guarantee may ease borrowing for smaller cities, but 
proper accounting and administrative capacity are essential. When a Parliamentary Standing Committee 
asked about the Fund's eligibility criteria and application process, the Housing and Urban Affairs Ministry 
said that it was still "under examination", a possible recipe for politically coloured spending. 
Across sectors, the Centre has, since 2014, increasingly reduced the share of public support while 
asking public systems to fill the gap using private finance. The CSIR was among the first casualties and 
urban development could be the latest. In higher education, the move towards infrastructure loans 
turned public universities into debt-laden entities that were expected to recover costs by increasing 
fees, affecting poor students. Studies of the National Health Mission's financial management have 
documented long delays to move funds through treasuries to implementing agencies, so in practice, 
hospitals have been asked to maintain services first and receive money later. Audits under the Ujwal 
DISCOM Assurance Yojana have exposed significant non-adherence and implementation gaps in the 
power sector. Private capital is not illegitimate and public systems should sometimes raise revenues; 
the issue is that the Centre increasingly conditions public support on market access instead of ensuring 
minimum service guarantees first. Thus, while the Fund's instruments are legitimate, it will increase the 
risk of becoming insubordinate to "bankability" if land records are a mishmash, ULBs routinely violate 
'master plans', and renters and low-income households do not receive additional protections. 
T