Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 222

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Retrieval 
A. banned 
2. Prohibited 
B. huge 
3. Mishap 
C. detached 
4. Enormous 
D. recovery 
5. Isolated 
E. incident 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Green energy can't yet bend climate curve 
ast year, renewable energy installations scaled a landmark, globally. Solar, wind and hydro 
edged out fossil fuels as the predominant source of power. The world's two most populous 
countries, India and China, led the charge in adding clean energy installations. Yet, human 
activities pushed global warming to 1.37 degrees Celsius in 2025, according to the latest 
Indicators of Global Climate Change (IGCC) report, published on Wednesday in the journal 
Earth System Science Data. That the increase in warming comes at a time when the appetite 
for clean energy is at record levels frames the scale of the challenge for policymakers the world 
over. The expansion in renewables, though significant, is still not enough to check the rise in GHG 
emissions. 
Unlike the power sector and, to an extent, the transport sector, large sections of the industry continue to 
be driven by fossil fuels. Transitioning to cleaner alternatives - green hydrogen, for instance - takes time 
and requires investments. In the short run, national policies can help by nudging manufacturers towards 
adopting energy-efficient machines, using recyclable materials, and minimising waste. Recycled 
aluminium, for instance, requires much less energy than new aluminium. However, sustainable 
equipment often has high upfront costs. Integrating green technologies with traditional systems requires 
research and development. All this can be contingent on cooperation between academia and 
governments, and among governments. Unfortunately, know-how transfer has been the Achilles Heel of 
global warming mitigation. 
At the current emission rate, the carbon budget - the GHG that can still be emitted if global warming 
can be kept below the Paris Climate Pact's threshold of 1.5°C-could be completely depleted in about 
three years, according to the IGCC report. The report comes at a time when national representatives 
have assembled at Bonn for mid-year climate talks. With the heatwave sweeping Europe and several 
other parts of the world, the report's warnings should resonate among the participants.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Nudging 
A. gathered 
2. Emitted 
B. desire 
3. Predominant 
C. main 
4. Appetite 
D. encouraging 
5. Assembled 
E. released 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- C 
4- B 
5- A 

            Long overdue: On coal exchanges 
Coal exchanges can balance out energy scarcities across India 
nveiled at a time of record domestic coal production, the Coal Exchange Rules, 2026, are 
a case of better-late-than-never. They will create a broad market-based mechanism 
through regulated trading platforms for the lynchpin of India's energy system - coal. They 
are aimed at enhancing price discovery, transparency, access for small consumers, as 
well as, one would hope, reduce bilateral agreements that are often opaque and come 
with a whiff of graft, too often. Today, most coal transactions between producers and buyers take 
place through long-term contracts, primarily for the power sector, followed by auctions, imports and 
captive mining. While India's commodity exchanges are well established, they function largely as 
financial markets rather than physical delivery platforms. Coal exchanges, however, appear closer in 
design to power exchanges, which, despite modest volumes, play a role in price discovery, market 
signalling and the development of secondary markets. As if to prove this point, coal exchanges are 
expected to serve the non-regulated sector, which relies on Coal India auctions where coal is often sold 
at a premium to the highest bidder. Power exchanges are not merely niche trading platforms; they serve 
as points of reference for the broader power market. They have enhanced price discovery and served as 
a balancing market without replacing long-term power purchase agreements. Initially the power 
exchanges were only balancing shortages, but eventually the spot prices became a barometer of the 
broader power market indicating scarcity, surplus and system stresses for all electricity stakeholders. 
Perhaps the first role of coal exchanges could be to open up inventories, allowing surpluses to balance 
out shortages across India. 
The templates for the two exchanges are not very different though the specific rules framed by the 
Coal Controller Organisation of India will determine the success of coal exchanges. Just as with the 
successes, the failures of power exchanges can also serve as lessons learned for coal. Coal is not as 
fungible as electricity, which once generated is the same everywhere requiring only minimum standards. 
Coal quality varies widely. Therefore, robust standards and quality assurance are as important as 
contract design, liquidity creation and enforcement. The latter set of requirements will ensure that major 
producers and consumers are drawn to the coal exchanges. The emphasis should be on facilitating 
participation of retail consumers unlike power exchanges, which are dominated by discoms. Coal India's 
stance will be crucial. Besides safeguards against volatility, dispute resolution mechanisms and 
improved transportation logistics will be important too, since the coal exchanges will be physical delivery 
platforms. 
U