Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 198

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Incontrovertible 
A. shame 
2. Indignity 
B. delay 
3. Compatible 
C. extremely difficult 
4. Fiendishly 
D. undeniable 
5. Dalliance 
E. suitable 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- C 
5- B 

            Prison outbreak: On the health crisis in India's prisons 
India's overcrowded jails pose a serious health risk to inmates 
The public health crisis in India's prisons is distinguished by its poorer infrastructure and a 
general disregard for treating ailments until they become inconvenient. A prisoner does not 
lose the right to health, a point courts have repeatedly stressed; yet, between August 20, 
2025, and March 9, 2026, around 92 inmates at the Jalpaiguri Central Correctional Home 
were infected with herpes simplex virus (HSV) and seven of them died. HSV is common in the 
general population but experts have said that in immunocompromised or overcrowded populations with 
poor care, it can lead to encephalitis, which is often fatal. The Home's 171% occupancy rate rendered 
good hygiene and isolation a luxury. According to the 2023 Prison Statistics of India, district prisons in 
West Bengal have reported occupancy rates exceeding 160% and certain facilities, such as the Kandi 
Sub-Jail, have historically reached staggering levels of over 400%. While the State has many foreign 
national inmates, overcrowding is a persistent fact of India's correctional facilities. In 2023, 30% of 
inmates in 10 prisons in Kerala were found to have skin diseases caused by humidity and a lack of 
personal space. A 2023 study in The Lancet Public Health found prisoners in India five times more likely 
to develop tuberculosis (TB) than the general population. In 2025, the Home Ministry ordered prison 
screening camps as unventilated environments allow TB to spread rapidly. The Nagpur and Indore 
central jails had major COVID-19 outbreaks. 
According to the India Justice Report 2025, HIV prevalence among inmates is also significantly higher 
than the national average due to shared equipment and inadequate screening at entry. Mandatory, 
comprehensive medical screening could catch many of these infections before they become injurious, 
which also requires facilities to have the requisite personnel. But the report also flagged a 43% vacancy 
rate for medical officers, resulting in the number of inmates per doctor being 2.6 times higher than 
recommended by the Model Prison Manual. There are also only 25 psychologists for India's 5.7 lakh 
inmates. Filling this gap requires integrating prisons into the National Health Mission, ensuring a 
sufficient number of health workers trained to manage outbreaks, and enforcing the Manual's standards 
uniformly across States. As West Bengal's actions in 2020 illustrate - temporarily releasing thousands 
of undertrials to relieve overcrowding in the South 24 Parganas District Correctional Home and the 
Baruipur Central Jail - the solutions are not confined to health. The judiciary must fast-track cases 
involving undertrials, who constitute the majority of inmates, expand the use of bail and non-custodial 
alternatives for minor offences and expedite the repatriation of foreign nationals. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Expedite 
A. ease 
2. Staggering 
B. merging 
3. Relieve 
C. hasten 
4. Ailments 
D. diseases 
5. Integrating 
E. shocking 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- D 
5- B 

            Fire and more fire: On hospital ICU fires, patient safety 
India must treat hospital fire safety as an issue of criminal accountability 
uttack is not an anomaly. It is the latest entry in a ledger of preventable deaths in Indian 
hospital ICUs. In 2016, 22 people died in a fire at a private hospital ICU in Bhubaneswar, 
which did not have the mandatory fire safety clearance. Following this tragedy, fire safety 
audits were made compulsory for such facilities. Last year, the Odisha government allocated 
about ₹320 crore for fire safety improvement across hospitals in the State. But this did not 
prevent the fire at the government SCB Medical College and Hospital, Cuttack, apparently caused by a 
short circuit in the ICU of the trauma care unit. Some reports suggest the fire may have started in a 
ventilator, which was later found heavily charred. The accident, which occurred in the early hours of 
Monday, claimed 12 of the 23 ICU patients. Although the hospital had a firefighting unit, its personnel 
arrived after more than 30 minutes, reportedly because staff did not alert them early. Additionally, the fire 
hydrants could not be operated by staff. Nevertheless, water is not the right medium to fight electric fires, 
which are best extinguished using carbon dioxide, a method that requires trained personnel. Last 
October, six patients were killed in an ICU fire in Rajasthan. In 2024, newborns died in an ICU fire in 
Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh. Two similar accidents were reported in Maharashtra in 2021. An audit in Jhansi 
revealed hazards including exposed wiring, inadequate earthing and electrical circuits not matching 
power load requirements - the last being a leading cause of electrical fires in India. 
ICUs have intrinsic safety risks, as their oxygen-rich environment can turn even a spark into an inferno. 
ICUs are also packed with electrical equipment, and the personnel are not always well trained in their 
safe handling. State-of-the-art medical equipment comes with advanced electronics and variable 
frequency drives that generate what are called "harmonic currents". These currents flow within circuits 
and typically have no safety devices such as circuit breakers. Harmonics create silent, persistent 
overheating and insulation degradation and are a severe fire hazard. Today's electrical practice lays 
down that every time a new ventilator is wheeled into an ICU, the wiring, protection and load capacity 
must be re-evaluated. Older facilities need an electrical upgrade before cutting edge equipment can be 
installed. As patients in ICUs are often sedated, intubated, and connected to machines, staff must be 
trained to ensure their safe evacuation. Until India treats hospital fire safety as a matter of criminal 
accountability rather than bureaucratic paperwork, the fires will keep burning and the bodies will keep 
mounting. 
C