Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 161

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Slackening 
A. lessen 
2. Alleviate 
B. changeable 
3. Prudent 
C. declining 
4. Mercurial 
D. striking 
5. Remarkable 
E. wise 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- D 

            Do not rush it: On the Special Intensive Revision of electoral rolls 
The SIR requires more time to prevent mass exclusions 
The Election Commission of India (ECI) has released the draft electoral roll for seven States 
and Union Territories after the first phase of the Special Intensive Revision (SIR) was 
completed with the submission of enumeration forms by eligible voters and their digitisation 
by Booth Level Officers (BLO). In Tamil Nadu and West Bengal, more than 97 lakh and 58 
lakh voters, respectively, were deleted. These deletions range from 7.5% of the pre-SIR rolls 
in West Bengal to 15% in the case of Tamil Nadu. In West Bengal, the deletions seem to be the highest 
in urban areas, especially Kolkata. A clear picture on the gender breakup and the reasons for the 
deletions will emerge only after parsing the ECI's booth-wise data. Reports also indicate that the ECI 
has identified a high number of enumeration forms in West Bengal as either unmapped to the 2002 
electoral roll or carrying doubtful linkages. The risk of widespread exclusions looms within a 
compressed 53-day hearing window with Electoral Registration Officers expected to insist on citizenship 
documentation, including proof of parents' birth details for those born after 1987. In Bihar, the Supreme 
Court of India's salve - allowing electors to use Aadhaar as a viable identity document - helped stave 
off a high number of deletions, but even then, 68 lakh names were deleted and 24 lakh added as fresh 
voters or through change/correction requests. The resultant drop in the female gender ratio, from 907 in 
the pre-SIR rolls to 892 in the final rolls, suggested that all was not well with the SIR in that State. 
Seen in this light, the Court's direction to the ECI to take a "sympathetic view" of representations to 
extend the enumeration phase by considering the "ground realities" is something that the electoral body 
should heed. While the ECI has proclaimed that it will ensure no genuine voter is disenfranchised, it 
relies on tabulating change/correction requests from Booth Level Agents of political parties rather than 
cross-mapping with government databases such as death registration data. Vulnerable sections such 
as short-term migrants, illiterate voters and married women risk disenfranchisement under this process, 
suggesting that the procedure of placing the onus on eligible voters to confirm their presence on the 
rolls is flawed. Add to this the logistical difficulties faced by States such as Kerala where the SIR 
coincided with local body elections, combined with the pressure on BLOs to meet tight deadlines, and 
the case for extending the timeline becomes compelling. Lastly, while the Court has helped ease voter 
registration during the SIR, it has still not heard the key question of the constitutionality of the whole 
process. The sooner it decides on it, the easier it would be for electors and the ECI. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Onus 
A. detailed 
2. Coincided 
B. responsibility 
3. Intensive 
C. imperfect 
4. Parsing 
D. overlapped 
5. Flawed 
E. analyzing 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- C 

            Beyond the optics: on Indian diplomacy, the global order 
India must push its vision for a shared global order across regions 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's three-nation tour to Jordan, Ethiopia and Oman, last week, 
had some common and connecting threads. The visit was primarily an attempt to draw closer 
bilateral ties with each country in a world that is turning increasingly transactional. Beyond 
that, however, all three countries belong to the Global South that India seeks leadership of 
and each is an important development partner in their respective regions. Mr. Modi's talks 
with Oman's Sultan Haitham bin Tariq saw the signing of the Cooperation Economic Partnership 
Agreement (CEPA). Oman-India trade has doubled to $10 billion in recent years. CEPA is expected to 
smooth the path for free trade agreement talks between India and the Gulf Cooperation Council. In 
Jordan, Mr. Modi met with King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, with the two sides launching cooperation 
agreements on renewable energy and water management. Mr. Modi's visit to Addis Ababa saw the 
launch of a strategic partnership. In the meet with Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed Ali, the talks 
were on strengthening trade and knowledge and technology exchanges. The discussions were also key 
in terms of scheduling the much-delayed Africa-India summit, to be held in India. Ethiopia is not just the 
headquarters of the African Union, it is a new member of BRICS, and with India taking over the 
Chairmanship in 2026, it will be an important partner in setting out development and economic relations 
within both groupings. 
In Amman, India and Jordan had less significant bilateral agreements but the talks were understood to 
be important in terms of the West Asian conflict and the Gaza Peace proposal. The tensions between 
Israel and its Arab neighbours have now imperilled the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor 
which is meant to traverse through Jordan. The Joint Statement in Amman had no mention of the 
corridor. Mr. Modi's presence in Jordan and a reiteration of India's traditional support for the Palestinian 
cause at a time when External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar was in Israel to meet Netanyahu 
government leaders was possibly meant to reassure the Arab leadership and those in the Global South 
strongly opposed to Israel's actions, that India's principled stand has not changed. The joint statement 
with Oman underlined the need for a resolution in Gaza including the establishment of a "sovereign and 
independent Palestinian state". However, unless that message is reiterated with India's Israeli 
interlocutors, especially Prime Minister Netanyahu who is expected to visit India in the new year, the 
import of visits such as the one by Mr. Modi would fail to build on the optics of bonhomie for a shared 
vision of the global order. 
P