Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 195

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Worrisome 
A. persistent 
2. Galloping 
B. surging 
3. Slant 
C. scope 
4. Chronic 
D. troubling 
5. Gamut 
E. bias 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- B 
3- E 
4- A 
5- C 

            Policy missteps: On the government's handling of India's fuel crisis 
India has allowed panic over fuel availability to spread 
The events unfolding in West Asia have shone a spotlight not only on India's energy security, 
but also on its policy preparedness and communication strategy in times of crisis. With India 
importing close to 90% of its oil needs, it is natural that any disruption to supply chains would 
hit it hard. The Strait of Hormuz is particularly vital in the supply chain. To the government's 
credit, it has been gradually trying to reduce India's oil import dependence. The push for 
ethanol and biofuels is a step in this direction. Smoothening their adoption should continue to be a 
policy priority in the near term. That said, India's dependence on imported oil remains vast and 
growing, with the economy expanding by 6%-8% every year. Therefore, measures such as ethanol or 
biofuel-blending are only likely to be of marginal strategic significance. The policies on importing oil 
need to become more long-term oriented and robust in the face of external pressure. The crisis in West 
Asia has shown India just how important supplies from Russia are, at a time when New Delhi had been 
cutting Russian oil imports due to American pressure. In the past, the government had given in to U.S. 
pressure over Iranian and Venezuelan oil. The U.S. is now encouraging India to import Russian oil 
again to steady global markets. The U.S.'s 50% tariffs were hard to bear, but India knew that the U.S. 
Supreme Court was deliberating on the issue, and, so, could have waited a month for its order. As 
things stand, India may no longer receive a discount for Russian oil, it has squandered Moscow's trust, 
respect from the U.S. is diminishing, and a trade deal with it remains distant. 
Government officials have made anonymous statements saying that fuel prices will not be hiked in 
response to higher oil prices. This is as much a political necessity as a moral one. After all, fuel prices 
were not cut over the last two and a half years even when oil prices were comfortably low. The Pradhan 
Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY), providing LPG connections to households, has also laid bare how 
policy does not anticipate crises. Households have benefited from the PMUY, but the resultant 
increase in LPG demand - without a commensurate increase in stable supplies and reserves - has 
meant that restaurants and hotels are now suffering amid shortages. Finally, the policy of the 
government to so far communicate only through off-record briefings and occasional tweets has meant 
panic over fuel availability has spread faster than warranted. Tuesday's inter-ministerial press 
conference came days late and no questions were taken. Clear, accountable communication was 
needed, yet missing. The government's crisis communication needs more work. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Massive 
A. huge 
2. Triumph 
B. sharp 
3. Consistent 
C. excellent 
4. Incisive 
D. victory 
5. Terrific 
E. steady 
Answer: 
1-A 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Catch them young: On overweight or obese children in India 
Increasing activity, eating healthy meals will help keep obesity away 
The phrase 'catch them young' has acquired a perverse slant in a world grappling with a 
galloping non-communicable diseases epidemic. The full gamut of conditions that comprise 
metabolic diseases, usually impacting people with advancing age, are affecting even children, 
studies show. The recently released World Obesity Atlas 2026 delivers a true shocker. As per 
the report, released on World Obesity Day (March 4), in 2025, there were 14.9 million children 
in the 5-9 years group and more than 26.4 million children in the 10-19 age group in India who were 
overweight or obese. About 41 million children had a high BMI rate. Further, estimates suggest that by 
2040, 20 million children in India will be obese and 56 million will be overweight. The report also 
estimates that at least 120 million children of school-going age are expected to have early signs of 
chronic illnesses such as hypertension and cardiovascular disease due to weight, in 2040. While, 
globally, China leads both categories, with 62 million children with high BMI and 33 million with obesity, 
India comes second, and is tailed by the United States (27 million high BMI; 13 million obesity). With 
such high obesity figures, the attendant health statistics too are unacceptably off the charts: In India, 
children aged 5-19 years with disease indicators attributed to high BMI, including hypertension, 
diabetes, hyperglycaemia, high cholesterol, and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease 
(MASLD) are projected to rise substantially by 2040. The risk factors are similar to adult-onset metabolic 
conditions, broadly categorised as insufficient activity and consumption of unhealthy foods. Other 
aspects, mentioned as causes, include poor access to healthy school meals for primary and secondary 
grade children, and sub-optimal breast feeding for infants aged 1-5 months. 
Clearly, not enough is being done to stem this tide of growing childhood obesity. The World Obesity 
Federation calls for greater action and emphasis on monitoring in terms of marketing restrictions and 
sugar levies on packaged food products. Experts have also called for restrictions on marketing packaged 
foods to children, sincere implementation of global physical activity recommendations for children, 
ensuring the mandatory breastfeeding period for infants, and healthier school food standards, besides 
integration of prevention and care into primary health systems. It is worrisome that obesity and 
overweight, once associated with higher-income countries, are now catching up rapidly in low- and 
middle-income countries. If nothing is done at this stage, the gains that the nation expects from its 
youth, even as it heads towards a grey path, will be hollowed out. The only way out is to catch them 
young, even before non-communicable diseases can. 
T