Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 173

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Egregious 
A. hostile 
2. Muted 
B. seize 
3. Annex 
C. extremely bad 
4. Aggressive 
D. confusing 
5. Puzzling 
E. restrained 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- B 
4- A 
5- D 

            Crisis in education: On the Supreme Court, higher education and student well-
being 
Higher education institutions need systemic reforms 
In an ongoing case relating to student suicides, the Supreme Court of India has issued nine 
directions to Central and State governments. Recognising the massification of higher education 
front-ended by privatisation without a commensurate boost in quality, the Court has taken note of 
student distress covering financial, social, social injustice and academic issues. The Court has 
invoked Article 142 of the Constitution and seven of the nine directions relate to record-keeping, 
reporting, and tracking suicides in higher education institutions (HEI) separately. Two directives order the 
filling of the posts of Registrars and Vice-Chancellors as well as all vacant faculty positions. Evidently, 
the Court sees these steps as critical to student well-being. 
Across India, ground reportage shows that many public HEIs, especially universities, report 50% 
vacancies. The University of Madras is a case study as it is the premier State-administered HEI in Tamil 
Nadu - a State which leads the nation in enrolment in higher education and with a stellar record in 
women's education. With such a storied legacy, the university was known for quality research besides 
awarding degrees in affiliated colleges through examinations. Teaching became an important component 
in the late 1970s, but in the last decade, its decline has been pronounced. No new faculty appointments 
have been made and the teaching strength is half of the sanctioned strength. The university's research 
component is just about functional. It boasts of centres for advanced studies such as in philosophy, 
botany and mathematics, but these are a shadow of their original selves. Today, the humanities, 
science-based and social science research focused on Tamil Nadu, that the government can leverage 
from its public universities, has been given short shrift. Vice-Chancellor appointments have been 
stalled by a recalcitrant Governor. The ambiguity thrown in by the Court on the Presidential reference 
on a Governor's powers may need to be resolved before Vice-Chancellor vacancies can be quickly filled. 
Filling faculty positions would have to follow UGC process that takes at least six months and a budgetary 
commitment that may be helped with Union government support. Availability of qualified faculty can be a 
hurdle. Corruption and political-ideological appointments have affected quality and need to be 
addressed. Although the four-month schedule prescribed by the Court might seem daunting, the order 
is a call to action to fulfil the basic requirements of a robust public higher education system before goals 
such as Viksit Bharat can be seriously aspired for. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Boast 
A. intimidating 
2. Aspired 
B. halted 
3. Daunting 
C. brag 
4. Commensurate 
D. desired 
5. Stalled 
E. proportional 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Fractured Yemen: On the Persian Gulf region's geopolitical fault line 
Saudi Arabia and UAE must help all Yemeni factions come together 
The flare-up in fighting between Yemen's Saudi-backed government and the Southern 
Transitional Council (STC), a separatist force backed by the UAE, has exposed the country's 
internal vulnerabilities and the Persian Gulf region's geopolitical fault lines. The crisis 
escalated in early December when the Aden-based STC launched a surprise offensive in the 
oil-rich Hadhramaut and al-Mahra governorates, which were under government control. It 
gained control of nearly half of the former South Yemen state, but the advances were short-lived. 
Government forces, covered by Saudi air power, swiftly recaptured the lost areas. On January 7, 
government forces entered Aden, forcing the STC to send a delegation to Riyadh for talks. In the Saudi 
capital, the STC announced its dissolution, while its leader, Aidarus al-Zoubaidi, who has been charged 
with treason, is believed to have fled to the UAE. The crisis also brought Saudi-UAE tensions into the 
open. Riyadh accused Abu Dhabi of transferring weapons to Yemeni separatists, and carried out air 
strikes on the port of Mukalla, reportedly targeting arms shipments. Following a rare public rebuke from 
Saudi Arabia, the UAE announced its withdrawal of forces from Yemen and an end to its 
"counterterrorism operations". 
The UAE was a part of Saudi Arabia's military coalition when it began bombing the Houthis (Ansar 
Allah), the Shia militia that captured Sanaa, Yemen's capital, in 2014. But the years-long war did little to 
defeat the Houthis. The Saudi-backed government operated from Aden in the south, until the STC began 
challenging it. The UAE then began support to the STC. Saudi Arabia, facing a direct security threat from 
the Houthis along its southern borders, entered into a ceasefire with the group, and sought to stabilise 
southern Yemen through the government. Yet, Riyadh grew increasingly alarmed by the expanding 
military power and defiance of the separatists. As government forces and the STC fought for influence in 
the south, the Houthis entrenched their position in the north, encompassing key population centres. 
The true victims of this multi-layered conflict, however, have been Yemen's civilians. The country faces 
one of the world's worst humanitarian crises, with millions on the brink of famine, an economy in ruins 
and devastated infrastructure. For now, an uneasy calm prevails in the south. But STC representatives 
in the UAE have dismissed claims that the council has been disbanded. For peace to take hold, all 
Yemeni factions must together establish a federal governance structure, addressing present power 
dynamics and historical grievances. For this to happen, Saudi Arabia and the UAE must bury the 
hatchet and work jointly for stability in their impoverished neighbouring country. 
T