Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 232

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Contour 
A. recovered 
2. Disposal 
B. bias 
3. Retrieved 
C. complete 
4. Skew 
D. removal 
5. Utter 
E. outline 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Two together: on the Japanese Prime Minister's visit to India 
India and Japan did well to ring-fence their ties from multilateral accords 
apanese Prime Minister Sanae Takaichi's first official visit to India turned out to be an occasion to 
signal enhanced bilateral coordination in the face of global uncertainties. Rapid changes in 
geopolitics and technological advances are forcing all countries into fresh thinking, most 
consequentially with regard to China. The U.S. appears less enthusiastic about the Quad 
grouping (with India, Japan and Australia) and is unsure of the nomenclature "Indo-Pacific" in its 
strategy. Against this backdrop, India and Japan declared a joint intent to continue with an 'updated' 
Free and Open Indo-Pacific (FOIP) posture, ring-fencing bilateral ties from multilateral arrangements. 
Ms. Takaichi signed at least 16 agreements and documents, including a joint statement on energy 
resilience to support bilateral cooperation along the 'maritime energy transport value chain'. The 
commitments to energy cooperation were supported by the awareness that to play lead roles in the 
FOIP, the two sides should cooperate in the energy domain from South Asia to the Indo-Pacific. This 
concern was also linked with the problems both sides faced regarding the safety of energy-carrying ships 
and sailors during the U.S.-Israel war against Iran. The two major Asian economies have a shared 
interest in ensuring that the nearest energy sources in the Gulf remain accessible. They have agreed to 
build naval platforms to enhance maritime domain awareness and surveillance. 
A joint statement issued during the visit mentioned "serious concerns" about the prevailing situation in 
the South China and East China Seas, and Japanese officials spoke to the media frankly about the need 
to address the Taiwan issue peacefully. Though a planned visit to Guwahati was dropped, Ms. Takaichi 
underscored Japan's attention to the northeastern regions of India by connecting them with "relevant 
partners and regional organisations" of the Bay of Bengal region. BIMSTEC was mentioned as a partner 
organisation for Japan. Japan has major investments in Bangladesh and Thailand, and connecting these 
projects, including the Matarbari port in Cox's Bazar, through an 'industrial value chain' with India's 
northeast can boost regional prosperity and security. Ms. Takaichi has painted a vast canvas of 
cooperation stretching from India's neighbourhood to the Pacific Ocean to protect the India-Japan 
relationship from the uncertainties of the current world order, but both sides have to manage multiple 
other relations effectively to ensure optimal outcomes. They have to manage their relations with China 
and the U.S. in such a manner that their strategic interests are protected and conflicts avoided. It can be 
a path of mutual learning and cooperation for India and Japan as they seek to navigate the global 
turbulence. 
J


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Turbulence 
A. dual 
2. Resilience 
B. eager 
3. Bilateral 
C. instability 
4. Enthusiastic 
D. emphasized 
5. Underscored 
E. flexibility 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Falling behind: On Mumbai and the monsoon 
Urbanisation in Mumbai is evolving faster than its infrastructure upgrades 
The southwest monsoon has been highly active over western India, with southwesterly winds 
loaded with moisture sweeping over the Western Ghats and delivering intense rains along 
the Konkan coast, while other weather systems offshore are routing more moisture over 
Mumbai and the surrounding areas. In urban areas in general, rainfall intensity matters more 
than volume. Mumbai itself can generally absorb moderate rainfall over several hours; 
however, its drainage - like in many Indian cities - cannot handle several hundred millimetres in 
short bursts. Heavy rainfall also overwhelmed river catchments in parts of Maharashtra, including 
around Nashik, while high tides reduced the efficiency of Mumbai's stormwater drainage, worsening 
flooding in the city. Mumbai-Pune rail services were suspended after landslides in the Bhor Ghat and 
flights were affected. The closures of the Mumbai-Pune expressway and the Mumbai-Goa highway and 
significant flooding on the Mumbai-Ahmedabad expressway were disruptive, speaking to the increasing 
erraticity of monsoon rainfall, the vulnerabilities associated with linear infrastructure projects, and the 
ease with which the effects of natural disasters are compounded by cascading failures. A chawl 
collapse in Mankhurd took the lives of five children. 
Mumbai lies on a peninsula built mostly on reclaimed land, former marshes, tidal flats, and low-lying 
coastal areas, creating the characteristic risk of higher flooding when rainfall coincides with high tide. It is 
compounded by decades of haphazard urbanisation that has encouraged water to run-off rather than 
be absorbed by the ground, forcing drains to handle more water than their design limits. After the July 
2005 floods, when it received 944 mm in 24 hours, Mumbai launched the BRIMSTOWAD project and 
widened drains, installed pumping stations, and undertook premonsoon desilting. Many of these works 
remain incomplete while some completed upgrades are based on assumptions about the monsoon that 
climate change has since undermined. Officials have also argued that pre-monsoon desilting helped 
reduce flooding in parts of Mumbai, but water on the Mumbai-Ahmedabad expressway, the chawl 
collapse, deadly tree falls in Kurla and Aarey, lack of redundancies in public transport, and the BMC's 
belated advisory to builders to halt hazardous construction all suggest a governance lapse. Mumbai's 
accountability also remains split across the BMC for local drainage and roads, the IMD for forecasting, 
the NDRF, two Railway zones, the State government, and highway authorities. Overall, the city has 
improved at shutting down to save lives and minimising the death toll - but as climate change and 
urbanisation evolve faster than infrastructure upgrades, simply waiting for system capacity to catch up to 
demand will be a failing strategy. 
T