Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 260

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Fleeting 
A. reckless 
2. Enamoured 
B. disturb 
3. Foolhardy 
C. transient 
4. Upset 
D. assessment 
5. Reckoning 
E. captivated 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B  
5- D 

            Falling edifice: On the Delhi private hostel building collapse 
Delhi's ambition as an education hub is at odds with its civic infrastructure 
The collapse of a five-storey building in Delhi, being run as a private hostel that killed seven 
and injured five in a densely populated colony abutting Delhi University's South Campus, 
has brought to light the twin issues of haphazard development in the capital city's residential 
areas and the shortage of affordable housing for students. With over 70,000 students 
entering Delhi University every year and almost half of them needing accommodation on a 
student budget, the city has failed to keep up with the growing demand. The University has, for all 
practical purposes, absolved itself of the responsibility, citing lack of land, leaving private players to 
cash in and run paying guest accommodations or private hostels that are not regulated. In a setup 
where every extra bed means more revenue, matchbox-sized rooms, often located in buildings that 
flout building bylaws and fire safety regulations and have no ventilation, are what several students call 
home. As soon as they arrive in the capital, students from many parts of the country realise that they 
are paying to live in the city not just in monetary terms but with their safety, security and sanity. 
The Delhi government says that it wants the city to be a national education hub and harness the soft 
power of its youth, but that will be not possible without addressing the need for affordable, safe student 
housing. The Delhi government has suspended five senior officers of the civic body, ordered a probe 
and announced that it was working on introducing a stringent policy under which every building used for 
public activity would be required to undergo periodic structural audits and obtain safety certifications. It 
must go beyond these reactive measures to seek more durable solutions. In 2024, the basement of a 
coaching centre flooded due to heavy rains claiming the lives of three civil service aspirants. After that 
incident as well, probes were ordered, basements were sealed and legal action was taken against 
owners but a larger systemic change remains elusive. The Centre and the Government of NCT must 
work together with educational institutions to develop more residential, travel and learning facilities for 
students. The introduction of four-year undergraduate programmes also means that students will stay 
on for an additional year, increasing the pressure on accommodation. Private hostels can be part of the 
solution, but crumbling civic infrastructure, illegal construction and lack of safety audits must be tackled 
through policy and strict enforcement. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Stringent 
A. violate 
2. Crumbling 
B. exonerated 
3. Absolved 
C. neighbouring 
4. Abutting 
D. strict 
5. Flout 
E. weakening 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- B 
4- C 
5- A 

            Dangerous phase: On the crisis in West Asia 
The Iran war is plunging the region in an economic and security abyss 
The crisis in West Asia is escalating on two fronts. On Tuesday, the U.S. said that its forces 
had struck five Iranian oil tankers in the Gulf waters after what it claimed were Tehran's 
attacks on U.S. warships in the region. Iran retaliated with a massive ballistic missile attack 
on the Muwaffaq Salti U.S. air base in Jordan and vowed to respond with greater force to 
every U.S. attack from now on. It has also announced a new restricted zone in the Strait of 
Hormuz, warning commercial ships against crossing it under American naval escort. Separately, 
Yemen's Houthis, who are closely aligned with Tehran, launched an attack on Saudi Arabia, 
wounding dozens. Riyadh has vowed a response. The Houthis, who control northern Yemen and parts 
of its Red Sea coast, have already enforced a naval blockade of Saudi Arabia's western ports and 
launched an offensive against the forces of Yemen's Saudi-backed government in Taiz and Mocha. 
With both the Strait of Hormuz, which connects the Persian Gulf with the Gulf of Oman, and the Red 
Sea, a critical trade channel between Europe and Asia, remaining flashpoints, a horizontally escalating 
conflict from Tehran to Jordan and Riyadh to Babel Mandeb threatens to plunge the entire region into 
an economic and security abyss. 
The current phase of the conflict could prove to be deadlier for several reasons. The U.S., which in the 
recent past has used intense military strikes and economic strangulation as separate policy tools in an 
attempt to force Iran to surrender, is now using both simultaneously to exert maximum pressure on 
Tehran. The U.S. naval blockade has largely prevented Iran from exporting its oil, while the American 
naval escort to a limited number of ships out of the Strait of Hormuz has helped Washington blunt the 
impact of Iran's chokehold on the waterway on global energy prices. But President Donald Trump was 
wrong if he thought his maximum economic and military pressure would force Iran to make 
concessions. Iran, instead, decided to escalate the conflict by attacking American warships outside the 
Persian Gulf, fully aware that this would invite a stronger U.S. military response. Iran appears to believe 
that it has a window of opportunity with the U.S. heading into its midterm elections within weeks and Mr. 
Trump remaining politically weak at home. If Iran's strikes on U.S. military vessels signal a clear decision 
at the top to escalate the conflict, its missile attack on U.S. bases in Jordan suggests that Tehran has 
been rebuilding its strike capabilities - capabilities that Mr. Trump had claimed were destroyed. As 
neither Washington nor Iran seems ready to step back from the precipice, the war is set to enter a more 
dangerous phase with global economic implications. 
T