Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 213

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
COLUMN A 
COLUMN B 
1. DEFAMATORY 
A. PRIVILEGE 
2. CONTEMPT 
B. DISPARAGING 
3. BOGUS 
C. PRINCIPLE 
4. PREROGATIVE 
D. DISRESPECT 
5. DOCTRINE 
E. FAKE 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- E 
4- A 
5- C 
Bat for the better: On the BCCI and the RTI Act 
Courts must treat tax exemptions to the BCCI as a form of state grant 
The RTI Act was originally designed to scrutinise the state, a limit that the BCCI has 
repeatedly tested thanks to its outsized power. The BCCI is a private body that operates 
commercially and lacks direct public financing. RTI disclosures could expose competitive 
information and compromise the flexibility required to govern a sport, especially since the 
BCCI already has anti-corruption measures and comes under judicial review if required. If the 
BCCI is brought under the Act's remit, there is also a risk of political forces abusing 
transparency requirements to exert greater influence on cricket administration. Even so, the 
Central Information Commission's (CIC) recent decisionto exclude the BCCI from the RTI Act isunlikely 
to go uncontested because the body has also monopolised a national sport. The BCCI benefits from 
national symbolism, police deployment at matches, concessional land allotments, and State hospitality; 
uses public stadium infrastructure; enjoys the regulatory privileges accruing to its monopoly status; and 
negotiates with foreign boards in ways that sometimes overlap with diplomacy. These liberties have 
T 

            thus sustained civil society concerns about being unable to scrutinise its conflicts of interest and 
governance arrangements. 
Under Section 2(h) of the RTI Act, the BCCI is not a constitutional or statutory body and was not created 
by government notification, leaving the matter to turn on whether it can be said to be under state control 
or financing. Following disputes in 2005 and 2013, the Supreme Court repeatedly said in 2015-16, when 
the BCCI was adopting the Lodha committee recommendations, that it performs public duties. The Law 
Commission furthered this position in 2018 because, it added, the BCCI also serves as a National Sports 
Federation without the Sports Ministry recognising it as one and received tax exemptions worth ₹2,100 
crore in 1997-2007 alone, a figure the Commission interpreted as foregone state revenue. Subsequently, 
former Information Commissioner Sridhar Acharyulu ruled the BCCI to be a public authority under 
Section 2(h). The Madras High Court stayed the order, and the CIC has now reversed the ruling. The 
CIC has admitted that the BCCI exerts a significant influence on public life while insisting that its decision 
is based on Section 2(h) alone. There is a contradiction between writ jurisdiction applying to the BCCI 
- as the Court affirmed in 2015 - even as the body is private enough to conceal its internal records. At 
this time, Section 2(h) should be amended to include any body discharging public duties, especially with 
monopoly power, perhaps by creating a category that simultaneously protects the BCCI's commercial 
interests. Courts must also treat tax exemptions as a form of state grant.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Exemptions 
A. examine 
2. Concessional 
B. reveal 
3. Scrutinize 
C. undisputed 
4. Expose 
D. discounted 
5. Uncontested 
E. exclusions 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 
Alarm bells: on the Index of Eight Core Industries data 
The Index of Eight Core Industries is only the latest indication of a distressed 
economy 
India's economy seems to have begun the financial year 2026-27 on a decidedly tepid note, going 
by the data released so far for April 2026. The latest of these, the Index of Eight Core Industries 
(ICI), shows that growth in these key sectors stood at a modest 1.7% in April. It would be easy to 
attribute this to the ongoing crisis in West Asia, and that is certainly a factor, but the slowdown 
started well before the war broke out. Growth in the ICI averaged just 2.8% in the entire financial 
year 2025-26, down from the 4.5% average for 2024-25 and significantly slower than the growth in 
the previous three years, each of which was above 7%. This suggests a more systemic domestic 
issue rather than an externally driven transient phase. Of the eight sectors, only three - steel, cement, 
and electricity grew at all in April 2026. The rest contracted. The crude oil and natural gas sectors have, 
in fact, contracted for 16 and 22 consecutive months, respectively. This should be of particular concern. 
Energy output cannot be ramped up overnight, but falling output for such long stretches should have 
raised some policy alarm bells even before the current energy crisis began. Separate datafrom the 
I

            Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas showthat domestic consumption of natural gas fell in April. Had 
India installed long-term gas storage facilities, as it should have, this fall in consumption would have 
provided a window to fill those reserves. Since such reserves do not exist, LNG imports in April were cut 
by 30%, likely in a bid to slow the forex outflow. The volumeof both oil imports and domestic production 
fellin April. 
This lower fuel consumption could be a result of government curbs on commercial usage. Nevertheless, 
the implications for growth are severe and are likely to play out over the next few months. Fertilizer 
output contracted in April after a brief return to growth in March. The only mitigating factorfor lower 
fertilizer output isthat demand is likely to be lower this year as farmers grapple with a below-normal 
monsoon and above-normal El Niño. This is, however, far from comforting. The resultant dipin output 
and rural demand isa grave prospect for the Indian economy. Steel and cement are the only sectors to 
have grown consistently, indicating sustained construction activity likely propelled by government 
expenditure. It remains to be seen how long this push can last amid the fiscal strain brought on by the 
current crisis. It is also not just the core sector data that is concerning. PMI data is close to four-year 
lows and GST collections from domestic sales are growing only slightly faster than inflation. The alarm 
bells are now difficult to ignore.