Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 156

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Baffling 
A. strict 
2. Waiver 
B. stuck 
3. Stringent 
C. confusing 
4. Upheaval 
D. exemption 
5. Stranded 
E. turmoil 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Prudent action: On RBI interest rate cuts 
The RBI needs to be ready for a quick policy pivot as it cuts rates 
The decision made by the Reserve Bank of India's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to cut 
interest rates once again, by 25 basis points to 5.25%, is both an assessment of India's 
current economy and also of what to expect over the next few months. Cumulatively, interest 
rates have been cut by 125 basis points in calendar year 2025. The last time such large cuts 
had been implemented was in 2019 when rates had been cut by 135 basis points, in reaction 
to a plummeting growth rate. India's quarterly GDP growth rate had fallen from 8.9% in the March 2018 
quarter to 3.3% by the quarter-ended December 2019. Growth is currently seeing the opposite 
trajectory. It has steadily been accelerating from 5.6% in Q2 of last year to the recently released 8.2% 
in Q2 of this year. From a growth perspective, there are at least two ways to look at the MPC's interest 
rate moves. The first is that the central bank is not convinced that growth is currently as robust as the 
numbers suggest, and so feels monetary policy needs to be as supportive as possible. After all, it could 
have left rates unchanged at 5.5%. The second is that the MPC feels that Indian companies are still 
sitting on excess capacity, and so the risks of overheating the economy are slim. So, it might as well 
push for more growth. The reality is probably a combination of the two: real growth looks higher due to 
an unusually low deflator, and companies can certainly afford to invest more, even if this is fuelled by 
debt. A rate cut addresses both issues. 
The MPC also possibly feels that the economic impact of the U.S.'s 50% tariffs have not yet fully played 
out. Supply chains take some time to realign, and so there might still be a further shift away from Indian 
exporters. Cheaper credit going ahead is something Indian MSMEs, especially exporters, will welcome. 
On the inflation front, the MPC has lowered its outlook for the year to a benign 2%. However, a jump in 
food prices or oil prices, for whatever reason, will undo all its calculations. The MPC must be ready to 
raise rates at the first sign of inflation rising faster than expected. The 2019 rate cut episode saw inflation 
jumping from 2% in January 2019 to 7.6% in about a year. Taken together, the rate cut suggests that the 
MPC feels that India's seemingly robust growth could do with further help, while inflationary worries are a 
thing of the past. Its decision to retain its neutral stance is a prudent one. Global uncertainty is such 
that growth and inflation trajectories could reverse direction suddenly, which would need a quick policy 
pivot. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Fuelled 
A. harmless 
2. Benign 
B. dropping 
3. Prudent 
C. quickening 
4. Plummeting 
D. powered 
5. Accelerating 
E. wise 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Note of harmony: On the debate on Vande Mataram 
India must uphold social cohesion with a rejuvenated national purpose 
ande Mataram, the salutation of India imagined as mother, inspired generations of nation-
builders who brought together diverse sections of society to fight for freedom from British 
colonialism. Written by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay and published with his novel 
Anandamath in the early 1880s, this year marks the 150th anniversary of the song. Leaders 
of the Indian National Congress (INC), which was leading the national movement, decided 
in 1937 to use the first two stanzas at its gatherings, and the Constitution of the modern Republic of 
India accorded it the status of the national song. It is only fitting that the country remembers the story of 
the song, its spirit, and its purpose in nation-building. Unfortunately, the parliamentary discussion to 
commemorate the anniversary of the song turned into a partisan diatribe in which old wounds were 
reopened and dormant grievances reframed. The BJP, led by the Prime Minister in the Lok Sabha and 
Home Minister Amit Shah in the Rajya Sabha, sought to drive home the point that the INC's decision to 
use only the first two stanzas sowed the seeds of the Partition, as the Muslim League gathered support 
for a separate state of Pakistan. The Opposition, led by Congress MP Priyanka Gandhi Vadra in the 
Lok Sabha and INC president Mallikarjun Kharge in the Rajya Sabha, explained the historical 
circumstances of the role of the song and questioned the need for any debate at all on Vande Mataram. 
Ms. Vadra said Parliament should be focusing on issues of the present that concern everyday lives 
rather than discussing the past. 
The past is important for the present of a national community, but it is important to draw the right lessons 
from history to avoid repeating mistakes. The national movement built unity among various religious and 
linguistic communities and sects by expanding the political space that they all could share. In fact, the 
story of Vande Mataram holds the path of accommodation and mutual respect that unite faiths and 
communities. Leaders of the national movement thought it was wise to find common ground rather than 
impose any faith. Millions of Muslims joined the chant of Vande Mataram across the country, as they 
marched alongside Hindus. While the unification project was successful to a great extent, Partition 
marked the fragile nature of that unity and flagged a concern for the future, that the promotion of any 
identity other than a secular, constitutional Indian commonness can be dangerous at any time. Inverting 
that history of harmony into a cause of fissure serves no purpose. India must uphold unity and harmony 
with a rejuvenated national purpose. That indeed is the greatest salutation to Mother India. 
V