Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 175

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Immutable 
A. unavoidable 
2. Pose 
B. clear 
3. Evident 
C. present 
4. Inevitable 
D. reasonable 
5. Sensible 
E. fixed 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- B 
4- A 
5- D 

            A piece of board: On India and Donald Trump's Board of Peace 
India must eschew temptation to be a part of Trump's peace board 
India on Thursday skipped the U.S. President Donald Trump-led "Board of Peace" charter 
announcement held in Davos, although the government is said to be still discussing the invitation to 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi to join it. The Board of Peace is part of the Trump administration's 
Phase 2 of the Gaza Peace Proposal, which is meant to oversee security, humanitarian 
assistance, reconstruction in the Gaza strip, and pursue a path to resolving the Israel-Palestine 
conflict through talks on a two-state solution. This was cleared unanimously by the UN Security 
Council (Russia and China abstained) last month, after Israel and Hamas agreed to a ceasefire 
and all living Israeli hostages were returned home. The proposal has been welcomed by many countries, 
not the least because it paused Israel's relentless bombing campaign and ground operations in which 
more than 70,000 Palestinians have been killed including 20,000 children, in retaliation for Hamas-led 
terror strikes in October 2023. There are some reasons for India to seriously consider joining the BoP, as 
about 20 other countries already have. India has been a principled supporter of the Palestinian cause, 
and a consistent provider of humanitarian assistance including through the UN agency UNRWA, and this 
could be an opportunity to help the brutalised Palestinian population directly and help rebuild their land. 
The decision by regional powers UAE, Saudi Arabia, Israel and Turkiye to join may put pressure on the 
Modi government to follow suit. The rupture in US-India ties and fragility of trade negotiations maybe 
another cause not to rebuff Mr. Trump's invitation at this stage as it may invoke his ire as French 
President Macron has. 
Neither pragmatism nor principle dictates taking such a decision in haste, however, and a country of 
India's standing cannot act based on the fear of missing out on a position of influence, or fear of 
punishment by the US. To begin with, even though the United Nations has backed the US's original 
plans, the latest structure and mandate of the BoP appears to have been unilaterally altered and does 
not actually mention Gaza, according to leaked versions of the charter. Mr. Trump has appointed himself 
as Chairman, with personal friends and family on the Executive board, and the charter released 
proposes to extend the BoP to other conflict-resolution ventures, suggesting it would seek to supplant 
the UN itself. Secondly, while the board will appoint Palestinian technical experts, it does not include the 
Palestinian leadership in any way, an affront to all countries including India who have recognised 
Palestine. That Mr. Netanyahu, accused of genocide by UN agencies should be included, but not the 
Palestinian president, adds to that injustice. For India, Pakistan's decision to join the board is a red-
flag, particularly if Mr. Trump decides to include the Kashmir dispute to peace plans the BoP will seek to 
I

            resolve. The BoP's 2-tier membership, offering "permanent" membership for a "fee" of one billion 
dollars is another red-flag. It will also be difficult, once on board, for India to cavil at its troops joining the 
International Stabilization Force (ISF), which is a non-UN initiative. Without clarity in the decision-making 
process of the board, members will simply be rubber-stamps to Mr. Trump's arbitrary and often 
illegitimate diktats on the future of the Palestinian people. Instead, New Delhi must continue to consult 
partners on the best way forward, particularly the Palestinians themselves, even as it keeps its own 
independent counsel. Above all, while making its decision, India must listen to its own conscience.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Fragility 
A. uniformly 
2. Relentless 
B. insult 
3. Supplant 
C. weakness 
4. Affront 
D. continuous 
5. Unanimously 
E. replace 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Right to dignity: On ASHA and anganwadi workers' protests 
Governments must ensure equitable pay for ASHA workers 
The ongoing protests by ASHA and anganwadi workers in West Bengal demanding their wages 
be increased to ₹15,000 a month is a sour reminder of efforts to deny them permanent 
employee status despite their centrality to many national and State welfare schemes. The 
Indira Gandhi government denied the first of many of these workers 'worker' status under the 
Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS), laying a foundation that India has continued to 
build on to bypass labour laws. As the workload increased, the formation of a national union 
followed in 1989, but even in the liberalisation era, the state created the category of 'scheme 
workers' and expanded social schemes but not permanent government jobs. The State of Karnataka vs 
Ameerbi (1996) - tribunal decision - further excluded anganwadi workers from the set of government 
employees even as the top court expanded the right to food, and thus the need for these workers, in 
2004. The ASHA programme took root in the mid-2000s and followed a similar trajectory, with the 
government framing them as 'activists'. Worse, in the 2010s, when the government, employers, and 
workers' unions recommended job regularisation, minimum wages, and pension and gratuity for ASHA 
workers at the 45th Labour Conference, successive UPA and NDA governments chose not to implement 
this. In 2015, the NDA government slashed the ICDS budget, and these workers have been protesting 
since at regular intervals just to make ends meet. 
The Centre also froze its contribution to these workers' pay in 2018, in effect leaving ASHA and 
anganwadi personnel to absorb fiscal shocks. Together with the lack of a guarantee of better working 
conditions for gig workers in the new labour codes, the state has effectively exited the social contract for 
many of its most vulnerable labourers in favour of promoting business metrics and more fiscal headroom 
at the Centre. States do wield more power in hiring and dispute resolution and are also more vulnerable 
to electoral pressure, which unions have taken advantage of, but there is also considerable disparity 
between States. As central honoraria stagnated, States were compelled to top up payments from their 
own budgets. Predictably, wealthier States and those facing sustained Union pressure have been able 
to offer more or additional benefits than fiscally constrained ones. Nonetheless, it is unconscionable 
that the practice of denying these workers their due still continues to be knowingly exploitative. The 
Centre must legally reclassify these 'volunteers' as statutory employees under the Code on Social 
Security, guaranteeing minimum wages and pension coverage. The Centre and States must also bridge 
fiscal gaps to ensure equitable pay across regions. Only by institutionalising these protections can India 
grant these essential workers their rightful dignity.