Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 176

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Trajectory 
A. reduced 
2. Expanded 
B. stalled 
3. Stagnated 
C. enlarged 
4. Slashed 
D. path 
5. Constrained 
E. restricted 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- B 
4- A 
5- E 

            Neo-colonial shadows: on Trump, Greenland and his Davos talk 
Donald Trump is driving U.S. allies towards China with his antics 
.S. President Donald Trump's neo-colonial posturing at the World Economic Forum in 
Davos could mark the opening salvo of what may be termed great-power climate wars - 
an irony, given that it is being waged by a climate-change denier. As global warming is 
rapidly melting Arctic polar ice, it has sharpened interest in the Northern Sea Route 
(NSR), which promises to cut shipping time between East Asia, western Europe and North 
America. The route also carries geopolitical implications: it enables tighter trade and market 
integration between China and the Western Hemisphere - an outcome Mr. Trump has 
often sought to obstruct. At Davos, his renewed suggestion that the U.S. could "purchase" Greenland 
has rattled allies and revived colonial anxieties. The remark came even as Sara Olsvig, chair of the 
Inuit Circumpolar Council, has said that "there's no such thing as a better coloniser", reflecting on over 
three centuries of Danish rule. 
Greenland's strategic value is undeniable. China has conducted trial commercial voyages through the 
NSR, promoting it as a shorter, and potentially lower-emission, shipping route, even though its existence 
is a product of climate breakdown. Chinese firms have also shown sustained interest in Greenland's 
significant mineral wealth, particularly rare earths. For Mr. Trump, who has weaponised trade and was 
forced to moderate tariffs against China due to Beijing's dominance over rare earth supply chains, such 
activity is easily framed as strategic encroachment into America's sphere of influence. Yet, extraction in 
Greenland would be neither easy nor uncontested. Much of the mineral wealth is buried deep under 
permanent ice, and local resistance is likely. Greenlanders have fought long struggles for political and 
economic sovereignty, achieving enhanced self-rule only in 2009. Recent opinion polls suggest that an 
overwhelming majority of Greenland's population opposes any form of American rule. Nevertheless, Mr. 
Trump claimed on the sidelines of Davos that Washington had reached a "framework" with the European 
Union, addressing U.S. security and resource interests. Media reports of proposals allowing indefinite 
American basing rights and access to subsoil resources reinforce the perception that this push is driven 
less by security than by extraction and control. Davos, long projected as a forum for global cooperation, 
appeared this year as a staging ground for resurgent resource nationalism. In doing so, it may have 
sown the seeds of a new world order, undermining the very rules-based system that post-war America 
once built. Ironically, by alienating allies, Mr. Trump may be nudging them towards Beijing - a China 
that has now arrived as a full-spectrum great power. 
U


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Rattled 
A. isolating 
2. Nudging 
B. perturbed 
3. Sustained 
C. intensified 
4. Sharpened 
D. prolonged 
5. Alienating 
E. coaxing 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- D 
4- C 
5- A 

            March of the Republic: On India's 77th Republic Day and the President's speech 
While celebrating achievements, the government must not ignore challenges 
resident Droupadi Murmu reflected on India's democratic and development journey on the 
eve of India's 77th Republic Day. Her emphasis was rightly on the self-reliance of the country 
in all fields and India's role as a messenger of peace and stability in a world that is 
increasingly fractious. Ms. Murmu highlighted recent national achievements and touched 
upon political and cultural themes that are currently the priorities of the Centre. She noted that 
the national song, Vande Mataram, was a "lyrical national prayer" even as the country celebrates the 
150th anniversary of its composition, and also paid tribute to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, whose 150th 
birth anniversary was celebrated recently, for his role in unifying the nation. The commander-in-chief also 
hailed the success of Operation Sindoor, which involved precision strikes against terror infrastructure, 
and credited it to India's growing self-reliance in defence. The President said India's progress towards 
becoming the third largest global economy was well on track, and commended economic reforms such 
as the GST and the new Labour Codes. She noted the great strides achieved by the country's women in 
fields ranging from agriculture to space, and their critical role as voters. Farmers, sanitation workers, 
teachers, scientists, and healthcare professionals also found special mention in the President's speech. 
The President invoked the idea of constitutional nationalism. Republic Day celebrations are an annual 
occasion to revisit the ideals of the Constitution and to review its progress in principle and practice. 
Cataloguing the achievements of the country is motivating, but also essential on such occasions is self-
reflection. Economic growth or military prowess are not the sole markers of progress for any nation. 
Singing paeans to the Constitution is one thing, but delivering on its principles by protecting the rights of 
citizens and discharging the duties of the state is quite another. The state in its self-congratulatory 
posture, as reflected in the President's speech, must not ignore the many struggles of the citizenry that 
persist even in the eighth decade of the Republic. Civilisational pride cannot be a ruse to overshadow 
the material questions of the present. Republic Day celebrates the ideals of the Constitution. Sectarian 
politics, the weakening of the federal character of the Republic, and corruption should not be allowed to 
undermine those ideals.