Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 216

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Touted 
A. widespread 
2. Rife 
B. meagre 
3. Myriad 
C. clumsy 
4. Cumbersome 
D. promoted 
5. Scant 
E. countless 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- C 
5- B 

            Quantum-safe thinking 
India must be alive to challenges posed by advanced encryption algorithms 
The new DST Task Force report on making India's digital ecosystems quantum-safe is a 
product of contemplating a threat that is both long-term and urgent. Today, public-key 
cryptography underpins online identity protection and secure communications. Its protective 
ability rests on mathematical problems that conventional computers cannot solve efficiently; 
thus, the information is 'hidden' behind a lock whose key is the solution to such a problem. 
However, a sufficiently capable quantum computer could use, say, Shor's algorithm to open this lock in 
minutes or hours. Symmetric cryptography, such as AES encryption, is less threatened by the advent 
of quantum computers but the existential exposure is nonetheless concentrated in public-key 
infrastructure, which secures everything from HTTPS to telecommunication networks. The shorter-term 
problem is the possibility of a bad actor harvesting encrypted data today and decrypting them later using 
quantum computers. Post-quantum cryptography (PQC) is software that can run on conventional 
computers but with the added benefit of resisting attacks from quantum computers. The DST report re-
commends three post-quantum standards finalised in 2024 to plan India's efforts on the post-quantum 
effort and that it begin migrating to this architecture. This prudent advice must be followed, especially vis-
a-vis critical infrastructure, financial services, power grids, and defence. 
The migration must continue even if "Q-day" -when quantum computers practically endanger public-key 
cryptography - is pushed back from the report's expected 2029. Indeed, experts disagree on this point, 
although the mainstream view is that both "Q-day" and migration will take at least a decade. 
Cryptography is in practice a set of dependencies often spread across - within, say, a ministry 
databases, legacy hardware, vendor software, authentication protocols, and control systems. Thus, the 
challenges of the sprawling organisational transition must not be underestimated. Moreover, since 
advanced AI can autonomously compromise the software layer today and quantum computers threaten 
the mathematics of encryption tomorrow, the threat surface is much larger than what "Q-day" alone 
portends. The report recommends the wider adoption of PQC and, in environments requiring higher 
security assurances, the more technically demanding quantum key distribution (QKD) as well. For India, 
that means a new budgetary allo-cation of at least ₹5,000 crore; upgrading legacy infrastructure for 
interoperability; rationalizing vendor dependence; and fostering and retaining the human capital, as 
QKD engineers are rare to-day. India must also periodically reassess its needs considering the acute 
trade-off QKD poses between security and operational efficiency. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Sprawling 
A. danger 
2. Acute 
B. traditional 
3. Conventional 
C. expansive 
4. Resisting 
D. sharp 
5. Threat 
E. opposing 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- B 
4- E 
5- A 

            Concrete fever: On India and heat management 
India must mandate green cover and reflective materials for its cities 
ri Ganganagar, in Rajasthan touched 48° Celsius this week, the hottest that India has been this 
year so far. Scorching summer heat in the run-up to the monsoon, which is delayed, is not 
unusual, but many Indians in the informal sector have to work directly under the sun in 
unprotected environments. Climate change is inextricably linked to heatwaves. India 
Meteorological Department data show that the frequency of heatwave spells has risen by 0.1 
days per decade since 1961 over India's Core Heatwave Zone that includes the central, northwestern, 
and eastern coastal regions, or about 30% of India's total land area. Their maximum duration has 
increased by 0.55 days per decade; and the 2015-25 interval is, according to the World Meteorological 
Organization, the warmest 11-year stretch since records began. But the emissions that produced these 
numbers are only the proximate villain. What makes India's heat uniquely lethal is not the atmosphere 
alone. Urban heat islands across Indian cities now run 2°C to 10°C hotter than their surrounding rural 
areas, the difference manufactured by concrete, asphalt, the butchering of tree cover, and the waste 
heat exhaled by the thousands of air-conditioners cooling offices. Delhi's average humidity rose by eight 
percentage points between 2015-19 and 2020-24. This has a lot to do with an increasingly sealed urban 
surface than global warming alone. This is where the seduction of the technological fix becomes 
dangerous with the instinct being to reach for more, better and cheaper ACs. This might shield the 
privileged office worker at the expense of the vast majority, many of whom are outdoor workers and 
street vendors. Paradoxically, the machines are, in a thermodynamic sense, fuelling the problem. 
What is called for instead is unglamorous, slow and politically difficult: urban design that mandates 
reflective materials and green cover, building codes calibrated to a climate that has already shifted; and, 
most urgently, the enforcement of labour laws that already exist but are honoured largely in the breach. 
These laws require employers to stop outdoor work when the heat index crosses thresholds that human 
physiology cannot safely absorb. India has not yet had a serious national conversation about budget 
heads for heat management.