Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 218

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Heed 
A. confront 
2. Disastrous 
B. pay attention to 
3. Tackle 
C. success 
4. Triumph 
D. catastrophic 
5. Onslaught 
E. attack 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- A 
4- C 
5- E 

            Brand value: On IPL 2026 
RCB helped IPL's latest edition build on previous successes 
erided for not matching potential with performance in the past, Royal Challengers 
Bengaluru (RCB) emphatically put those old ghosts to rest. Having won the Indian Premier 
League (IPL) title last year, RCB did one better this year, and retained the championship. A 
commanding display over Gujarat Titans in the final at Ahmedabad's Narendra Modi 
Stadium on Sunday ensured that RCB joined the likes of Chennai Super Kings (CSK) and 
Mumbai Indians, teams that have won the title for two consecutive years. Ever since the league's 
inception in 2008, the Bengaluru squad tended to flourish in spurts and then fade away. Three finals 
were made too prior to 2025, and in all those summit clashes, RCB choked. Last year, however, a 
turnaround was effected but as Rajat Patidar's men exulted, the moment turned tragic with 11 fans 
losing their lives in a stampede outside the M. Chinnaswamy Stadium in Bengaluru. In the latest edition, 
RCB maintained remarkable consistency and while Patidar marshalled his resources, Virat Kohli, 
Bhuvneshwar Kumar, Krunal Pandya and Josh Hazlewood chipped in. Fittingly, Patidar dedicated the 
triumph to the 11 fans who passed away. Meanwhile, Titans led by Shubman Gill, ran into a stronger 
outfit in the final and could not cash in on the advantage of playing at their home ground. 
Having commenced on March 28, the IPL with 10 teams and 74 matches, had a bloated air and at 
times viewer interest dipped. The cricket, though, was from the top-drawer of T20 cricket as batters 
muscled sixes. The leading star was Vaibhav Sooryavanshi, who belied his 15 summers. The 
Rajasthan Royals' player is one for the future and there is talk of the selectors fast-tracking him into the 
national squad. Just as Sachin Tendulkar made his international debut at 16, Sooryavanshi too seems 
set to join that space of young talent pursuing higher glory. For now, a spot in T20I beckons even as the 
youngster is keen to play Tests too. Just as RCB, Titans, Sunrisers Hyderabad and Rajasthan Royals 
made it to the play-offs, legacy units such as CSK, Mumbai Indians and Kolkata Knight Riders fell by the 
wayside. A churn is on the cards and Rishabh Pant has already relinquished his captaincy with the 
Lucknow Super Giants. India, the reigning T20 champion, has enough talent as was evident through 
the IPL. The club against country debate too stirred up as England speedster Jofra Archer's IPL 
contract overlapped with the one that he has with The England and Wales Cricket Board. The IPL is a 
massive sporting brand but it should not cannibalise traditional cricket. 
D


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Tended 
A. celebrated 
2. Choked 
B. mocked 
3. Derided 
C. collapsed 
4. Triumph 
D. victory 
5. Exulted 
E. inclined 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- B 
4- D 
5- A 

            Preserving the record: On the right to be forgotten 
The right to be forgotten must be set against public interest 
In the one hand, constitutional law holds up a principle of open justice that, among other 
things, allows public scrutiny of courts, facilitates public understanding of the law, and 
creates a historical record of the administration of justice. On the other, in Justice K.S. 
Puttaswamy (2017), the Supreme Court of India recognised the right to informational 
privacy, including the ability of individuals to exercise some control over personal 
information about themselves. The Delhi High Court order on May 29 concerning the 'right to be 
forgotten' illustrates how these two principles can sometimes point in opposite directions. While the 
digitisation of court records transformed the ability of anyone with an Internet connection, but also search 
engines and automated archivers, to access judgments and legal records, it also altered the 
consequences of publicity. In Europe, where the resulting persistence of digital information first gave rise 
to the 'right to be forgotten', the right is usually weighed against the freedom of expression and public 
interest. In India as well, the right should accommodate the principle of open justice without necessarily 
breaching the bounds of the right to privacy. Yet, the High Court decided otherwise. Justice Sachin 
Datta concluded that simply updating records would not suffice as search engines could excerpt small 
portions without sufficient context, that open justice does not demand the ability to discover particular 
details of the case using the accused person's name, and that updating the official version would not 
necessarily update records that have since been copied to other websites. 
The real problem is incompleteness, not discoverability. If a court acquitted or discharged a person from 
a dispute, anyone looking for the proceedings should also find that decision, rather than limiting a 
searcher's ability to find the original decision. This is crucial if open justice is understood to require the 
records to be practically accessible rather than merely exist somewhere. Court records are official acts 
of the state and their obfuscation in any manner vis-a-vis the public record will have serious 
ramifications for the public record, to echo the court in the closely related Indian Kanoon matter (2024). 
While the High Court's concern about the petitioner's right to privacy is commendable, it should also 
consider digital accuracy as the way out. That is, judicial records must be wholly public as well as 
updated to prominently reflect major actions and decisions, rather than preserve the accusation alone, 
and the judiciary must impose conditions on any platform, including court registries, indexing legal 
information to refresh their databases on a regular basis and endeavour to display the results of any 
user queries with the proper context. Doing so would protect both fundamental rights and address the 
problem's root cause. 
O