Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 229

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Reckon 
A. predictable 
2. Rubble 
B. believable 
3. Foreseeable 
C. debris 
4. Plausible 
D. disastrous 
5. Tragic 
E. estimate 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Buyer beware: On the QR code-based drug traceability framework 
Tracking down defective batches of drugs is essential 
The Health Ministry's notification to expand Schedule H2 drugs to entire therapeutic classes 
now from a curated list of brands earlier is a commendable change from regulating based on 
revenue to regulating based on risk. The government had introduced Schedule H2 in 2022-23, 
which required a barcode or QR code on each pack of specific drugs to verify the pack's 
authenticity. It is part of a framework that also touches on regulating active pharmaceutical 
ingredients and export-oriented pharmaceutical compliance. Now, with the additional symbols encoding 
a product identifier, the manufacturing licence number, batch number, and other details, authorities hope 
to better track down defective batches. Counterfeit networks have long targeted vaccines, cancer 
medicines and antimicrobials, with WHO flagging high volumes of fake antimicrobials in low- and middle-
income countries. India has one of the world's highest antimicrobial resistance rates, and substandard 
antimicrobials can lead to sub-therapeutic dosing, exerting selection pressure on resistant strains. The 
Narcotics Control Bureau has also expressed concerns about medicinal opioids and psychotropic 
substances 'leaking' into illicit markets. The government will hope that the new system addresses the 
U.S. FDA's and the European Medicines Agency's recurring concerns about quality control, an issue on 
which India has found itself on the back foot over contaminated cough syrups. The U.S. Trade 
Representative has also repeatedly identified India as a leading source of counterfeit medicines, with 
many fake pharmaceuticals seized at the U.S. border originating from or transiting through India. 
Together with policy changes effected by the Jan Vishwas Act 2026, the new framework finally 
distinguishes between procedural non-compliance and substantial non-compliance, considering only the 
latter constitutes meaningful enforcement. In the long term, the government should rationalise the 
compliance burden and eliminate the risk of corruption associated with discretionary enforcement. The 
government must also recognise that the QR code system will only be effective if backed by a state-
managed database that pharmacists and regulators can access in real time, supported by interoperable 
software and scanning infrastructure across States. Second, pharmacists and consumers must develop 
a habit of verifying medicines before a sale. Third, the compliance needs imposed by new packaging 
requirements and the IT integration will strain MSME manufacturers in particular. Finally, prescription 
data on controlled substances is sensitive information and will need to be handled with a digital 
governance layer that does not yet exist. Thus, whether the new framework will improve India's 
reputation as a pharmacy comes down to its implementation. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Counterfeit 
A. connectable 
2. Recurring 
B. reliability 
3. Interoperable 
C. fake 
4. Authenticity 
D. remove 
5. Eliminate 
E. repeated 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Caught in the middle: On India and curbing drug abuse 
India must prioritise reduction of harm from drug abuse 
India is located between two major drug-producing regions: Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran to the 
west and Myanmar, Thailand, and Laos to the east. While the West has historically dominated 
heroin production, the International Narcotics Control Board has said Myanmar has become the 
world's leading source of illicit opium while East and Southeast Asia remain major sources of 
methamphetamine. Officials have said drugs are being received at Gujarat, Kerala, and Tamil 
Nadu via maritime routes. Similarly, some drugs are produced domestically using illegally diverted 
pharmaceutical ingredients, aided by the fact that individuals possessing small quantities of heroin can 
attract up to six months' imprisonment, whereas drugmakers that cannot account for lakhs of doses 
often face only slaps on the wrist. The rise of Myanmar, where the territory under ethnic armed 
organisations is expanding, as a key source is also troubling since it shares a border with India. The 
Narcotics Control Bureau has noted a dramatic surge in the use of drones to smuggle drugs across 
borders, especially over Punjab. Traffickers are organising over the darknet and using cryptocurrencies. 
The pillars of India's response thus aim to keep the enforcement regime from being out-innovated and 
improve regulatory certainty. 
States are trying to adopt a 'whole of society' approach recognising the public health and social 
dimensions. However, India needs to do more. Physical abuse and forced detoxification are frequently 
reported from many private centres. Punjab has an extensive network of de addiction centres providing 
opioid substitution therapy, and some northeastern States to a secondary extent, but most large States 
have much less access relative to need. Most Integrated Rehabilitation Centres for Addicts are located in 
urban areas whereas the highest density of addicts in Punjab are in border villages and rural pockets. 
Likewise, relapse is often treated as a moral failure and many addicts avoid government centres fearing 
social ostracisation, particularly in rural North India. The persistence of criminal records for small-scale 
possession prevents youth from getting jobs, reducing their odds of escaping the drug-crime cycle. 
Although the Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyaan has said it has sensitised over six crore women, facilities 
dedicated to women are scarce and concentrated in urban areas; stigma, caregiving responsibilities, 
and lack of gender-responsive treatment keep many women from seeking or completing care. Finally, as 
evidence shows, disrupted supply can drive many users to cheaper alternatives unless accompanied by 
effective treatment. India must therefore shift public focus from seizures and arrests to the number of 
lives restored. 
I