Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 255

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Delineate 
A. palpable 
2. Disputed 
B. eagerness 
3. Tangible 
C. outline 
4. Momentum 
D. debated 
5. Keenness 
E. impetus 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Danger from above: On the Nepal flood 
Natural outbursts in hilly terrain are rising amid climate change 
isaster struck Nepal on Wednesday after a flash flood ravaged the Himalayas and 
foothills. As of Thursday, at least 359 people including several foreign tourists, had died, 
while at least 300 Indians remained missing. Satellite imagery analysed by global 
agencies, including the Indian Space Research Organisation, points to a glacier collapse 
or ice-rock avalanche in Tibet, possibly followed by a temporary river blockage and its 
sudden failure. An earthquake was initially suspected, but evidence has not borne it out. While the 
immediate flood wave has passed, there are warnings of possible secondary flooding from debris 
blockages upstream. There has been extensive damage along the Bhote Koshi and Trishuli corridors, 
with settlements washed away and hydropower and monitoring infrastructure damaged. Nepalese 
authorities said 35 motorable and 45 suspension bridges and about 40 kilometres of roads had been 
damaged. 
Given that it is the monsoon, north India and the larger Himalayan regions are under the influence of a 
powerful Western Disturbance. It would thus not have been unreasonable to attribute the floods to these 
extratropical storms that can cause clouds to collide with mountains and release enormous quantities 
of rain at short not-ice. But the ubiquity of satellites is helping establish a more complex picture, pointing 
to collapsing glaciers and recalling the October 2023 South Lhonak Lake disaster in Sikkim. There, an 
eponymous Himalayan glacier suddenly gave way, releasing millions of tonnes of water, debris and 
rock that pulverised Sikkim's largest hydro-power project. Subsequent analysis showed that the 
resulting Glacial Lake Outburst Flood (GLOF) had been years in the making. The Indian Himalayas have 
nearly 7,500 glacial lakes and about 15,000 glaciers, some monitored through remote sensing. Yet, fully 
assessing their condition requires site visits, difficult because these lakes lie in inhospitable terrain while 
expeditions are generally feasible only from July to September. Even with satellite monitoring, 
accurately forecasting a glacier collapse remains exceedingly difficult and can be counterproductive if 
warnings trigger panic among residents who, often because of habit or lack of alternatives, are unlikely 
to move out of harm's way. Dams and hydropower projects in such terrain are often among the first 
casualties of these natural outbursts, which are increasing amid global warming. Beyond relief and 
rescue, governments must enforce construction codes, discourage settlements and large projects in 
known vulnerable zones, and invest in better tracking of glacier health. Such monitoring can feed long-
term disaster planning into development programmes. A tragedy is frequently not the result of a 
conspiracy but the product of passive neglect; the latter can be addressed. 
D


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Debris 
A. possible 
2. Inhospitable 
B. devastated 
3. Ravaged 
C. unfriendly 
4. Panic 
D. fear 
5. Feasible 
E. remains 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- B 
4- D 
5- A 

            Deferred rivalry: On the U.S. Open 
Injuries are coming in the way of anticipated matchups in US open 
The Carlos Alcaraz-Jannik Sinner rivalry is no doubt this era's defining matchup, but it has also 
been punctuated by long pauses. In early 2025, Sinner was absent for three months as he 
served a doping-related ban; this season, Alcaraz was out of action for four months from mid-
April owing to a troublesome wrist. Just when it seemed that the two leading lights will come 
face to face at the US Open starting Sunday, Sinner has been waylaid by a knee injury. In 
2025, they met six times in six months; there has just been a solitary duel in the subsequent nine. In a 
way, the postponement of the battle may suit Alcaraz, for the seven-time Major champion has not played 
a competitive singles fixture since Barcelona in April. The Spaniard has warmed up for Flushing 
Meadows with two mixed doubles matches partnering the legendary Serena Williams, but a best-of-five-
sets contest is a significant step-up. The 23-year-old will open against Roman Safiullin a tricky player 
who beat Alcaraz in 2023 on a Paris hard-court and reached the Wimbledon fourth round this year and is 
drawn to meet the inform American Ben Shelton in the quarterfinal. Potential semifinal opponents include 
24-time Slam titlist Novak Djokovic and 2021 US Open winner Daniil Medvedev, which makes the 
defending champion's path challenging. 
However, Djokovic and Medvedev are on their own tough journeys. The 39-year-old Serb is no longer 
the once-renowned hard-court master, and lost his lone match in Cincinnati - after the semifinal reverse 
to Sinner at Wimbledon. Medvedev was last in a Major final at the 2024 Australian Open and is without a 
trophy since February. Alexander Zverev thus has a golden opportunity to make his big breakthrough 
on his favourite surface. Without Sinner, the German will be the top seed, and following the French Open 
triumph and Wimbledon runner-up finish, the 29-year-old will be confidence personified. Among women, 
two-time defending champion Aryna Sabalenka would have liked to be that player, but the Belarusian 
World No. 1 has wobbled of late and seen her lead at the top cut to less than 450 points. Her chief 
challenger Elena Rybakina may be racing against time to recover from an ankle injury, but with Iga 
Swiatek, Coco Gauff and Jessica Pegula all in impressive form leading into New York, Sabalenka will 
have a daunting task. Wimbledon winner Linda Noskova will be looking for a worthy follow-up while the 
fast-rising 21-year-old from the Philippines, Alexandra Eala, will hope to continue her recent eye-
popping run. With Serena and Venus Williams set to pair up in doubles, there will be a rich sprinkling 
of stardust too. 
T