Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 256

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Renowned 
A. famous 
2. Solitary 
B. hindered 
3. Wobbled 
C. glamour 
4. Waylaid 
D. isolated 
5. Stardust 
E. staggered 
Answer: 
1-A 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Drawn to defeat: On India's chances in the ICC World Test Championship 
India is now in a must-win situation in the Test Champion cycle 
This was a triumph that ironically suffered the after-effects of a loss. India's 1-0 series 
victory in the two-Test outing recently in Sri Lanka, in normal circumstances, would have 
been seen as a positive. However, in the race for key points in the ICC World Test 
Championship (WTC) cycle, the ideal India-centric result would have been a clean sweep at 
2-0. But with Dhananjaya de Silva's men thwarting India's bid for a win in the second Test at 
Colombo's Sinhalese Sports Club Ground, and forcing a draw, the visitors continue to occupy the fifth 
slot in the WTC rankings. It is a position one below Bangladesh after the eastern neighbour secured a 1-
1 draw against Australia in the series Down Under. If a WTC final berth has to be secured then India has 
to do extremely well away against New Zealand and at home against Australia, and then hope that the 
various permutations cropping up will be favourable. Shubman Gill's men find themselves in this 
piquant situation due to their vulnerability at home, having lost a Test series to South Africa last year. 
The transition angst within the Indian unit is yet to abate following the exit of R. Ashwin, Virat Kohli and 
Rohit Sharma. Slowly, new heroes are emerging and the results could improve. 
Stepping into the Emerald Isle and hamstrung by the injured Jasprit Bumrah's absence, India did its 
homework. A warm-up fixture was won, while some of its players had earlier turned out for India A 
against Sri Lanka A and were ready. When the series commenced with the first Test at picturesque 
Galle, India led from the front and won by 165 runs to secure a 1-0 lead. Devdutt Padikkal's 167 and 44 
led the run charts and most importantly it also meant that the critical number three spot in the batting 
order had found an apt occupant for now. This is the same position that in the past had featured 
pedigreed men such as Dilip Vengsarkar, Rahul Dravid and Cheteshwar Pujara. Left-arm spinner 
Manav Suthar too did well and his classical mode is a throwback to a gentle past. Sri Lanka's brief 
resistance hinged on Sonal Dinusha, who registered a ton. Soon he would become an immovable 
personality at the batting crease and India learnt it the hard way at Colombo. His twin hundreds helped 
Sri Lanka erase the ignominy of suffering a follow-on and also survive a tense final day to wrest a draw. 
The conclusion felt like a victory for the host and India is now placed in a must-win corner in its future 
Tests. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Piquant 
A. diminish 
2. Ignominy 
B. victory 
3. Abate 
C. intriguing 
4. Triumph 
D. anxiety 
5. Angst 
E. shame 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Step up regulation: On AYUSH medical education 
Alternative medicine systems should comply with quality control 
on-government institutions accounted for 86% of Ayurveda and 85% of homoeopathy 
colleges in 2024, according to government data, showing that the private sector is leading 
the AYUSH medical education infrastructure's rapid expansion. Permitted seats also rose 
by 43% and total admission capacity by 25% between 2021 and 2024, when the Centre's 
AYURGYAN allocation for AYUSH education, training, research, innovation and capacity-
building, increased nearly sixfold. While similar concerns vis-à-vis allopathic medical education have 
been confined to whether institutions adequately prepare students for evidence-based practice, the 
questions of the AYUSH systems are about the quality of training and what students are being trained 
to practise. Given the combination, it is notable that quality issues in India's AYUSH system long predate 
the current boom. In a 2005 audit, the Comptroller and Auditor General found insufficient hospital beds, 
outpatient services, and/or staff widespread among homoeopathy colleges, with bed occupancy from 1% 
to 71%. A 2020 Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine article similarly reported that many 
institutions had a shortfall exceeding 50% in the teaching staff required by standards then. The 
regulator, the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM), has often withheld or 
denied permission to institutions after inspections have found gaps in faculty strength and infrastructure. 
While this shows a working regulatory system, the expansion led by the private sector is of additional 
concern as it is accompanied by incentives for these institutions to maximise student intake while 
maintaining faculty size and laboratory infrastructure. As of August 21, the NCISM had listed 17 
Ayurveda colleges - all private - whose permissions it had denied, several for "non-compliance with 
inspection process". In Hillside Ayurveda Medical College (2023), the Karnataka High Court 
acknowledged that "often educational institutions are ... guilty of admitting excess students for financial 
gains". [M] Half of all private institutions [A]/ the lowest grade, including nearly [B]/ of all homoeopathy 
colleges [C]/ Homoeopathy has given 41% [D]/ the National Commission for [E]. Effectively, the 
expansion of AYUSH education is amid persistent quality issues, including inadequate or disputed 
faculty strengths, failures in inspection requirements and student intake numbers, and even allegations 
of fictitious faculty. While it would be premature to infer that the rapid expansion evident will have 
amplified these problems, the persistent regulatory non-compliance warrants tougher quality control and 
a reexamination of the incentives for private institutions, together with questions about the evidence 
backing AYUSH medicinal systems. 
N