Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 203

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Terrible 
A. struck 
2. Astronomical 
B. experienced person 
3. Veteran 
C. inherent 
4. Intrinsic 
D. extremely large 
5. Slammed 
E. awful 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- B 
4- C 
5- A 

            Neighbours first: On India-Nepal ties 
India must invite the new Prime Minister of Nepal, Balen Shah, to revive ties 
In an exchange of early messages, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Nepal's newly- sworn-in 
Prime Minister Balendra "Balen" Shah said they look forward to "working closely" to take forward 
bilateral ties. Delhi and Kathmandu are prepared to begin a new chapter in relations, united by 
familial bonds, a shared culture, open borders, and intertwined politics. Land-locked Nepal has 
depended on trade and transit through India, with India's plans for an energy grid in the region an 
important channel for Nepal's hydropower exports and revenues. Like many former leaders of Nepal, Mr. 
Shah studied in India. Familiarity aside, it would be a mistake to assume that his ascension will chart a 
well-worn and predictable course between the two countries. At 35, he is Nepal's first Madhesi leader, 
and upturns the old dominance of the Brahmin-Chettri Pahadi elite. New Delhi must have a greater 
understanding of the priorities of this new Gen-Z movement that brought down the K.P. Sharma Oli 
government in 2025. This is a new leadership that has not inherited the old foreign policy 
understandings of the past generations of leaders that came through the panchayati movement, 
Congress and Communist parties, or the Maoist movement that overthrew the monarchy. In that sense, 
the Shah government's foreign policy, including its ties with China and the U.S., as well as the 
overarching relationship with India, is yet to be formalised. In the past decade, India has increased its 
development assistance to Nepal, but it also strained its ties over the constitution, the long blockade on 
border trade, and territorial issues. As Mayor of Kathmandu, Mr. Shah was known for his overt 
nationalism, and rejection of the "hegemony" of India and other powers, while his use of a map of 
"Greater Nepal" had been read with some concern in New Delhi. 
The Modi government should tread lightly, and positively, as the Shah government finds its feet, but 
offer India's full support in dealing with Nepal's immediate challenges. Among those are the impacts of 
the war in West Asia where Nepal will need help with fuel and fertilizer imports. Approximately 14% of 
Nepal's population (about 3.5 million) work abroad, and the country is dependent on remittances and 
tourism revenues. New Delhi could also reconsider requests from previous Nepali governments to allow 
overflight for new Nepali airports, reduce restrictions on purchasing Nepali power produced with third-
country assistance and to update the bilateral friendship treaty. Differences delayed New Delhi's 
invitation in 2024 to Mr. Oli, upon his election - he eventually visited Beijing first. It is time to quickly 
invite Mr. Shah to visit Delhi at the earliest, and for Delhi and Kathmandu to move forward, putting 
"Neighbours first" in South Asia. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Overt 
A. stressed 
2. Ascension 
B. interlinked 
3. Strained 
C. mutual 
4. Intertwined 
D. rise 
5. Bilateral 
E. open 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Going downhill: On the Iran war, U.S. strategy 
A ground invasion of Iran will only make matters worse for the United States 
resident Donald Trump has made several self-contradictory statements ever since the U.S. 
and Israel attacked Iran on February 28, making it increasingly difficult to take anything that 
The says about the war seriously. In the early days, he insisted that the conflict would end 
soon, but it has now entered its second month. On March 21, he threatened to strike Iran's 
power plants in 48 hours unless Tehran reopened the Strait of Hormuz. The waterway 
remains under Iranian control, and Mr. Trump has extended his deadline twice. Despite his repeated 
claims that U.S. forces destroyed Iran's military capabilities, Tehran continues to attack U.S. bases in the 
Persian Gulf and Israel. Last week, U.S. media reported that an Iranian strike at the Prince Sultan Air 
Base in Saudi Arabia damaged an elite E-3 Sentry AWACS aircraft and several KC-135 aerial refuelling 
tankers. Mr. Trump now says that his administration is in talks with Iran and a deal is possible. But Iran 
says that it has got a U.S. proposal to end the war and has made its counter-proposal. The U.S. wants 
Iran to abandon its nuclear programme, limit its missile programme and reopen the Strait; Tehran 
demands war reparations, guarantees against future attacks and an end to fighting on "all fronts". Amid 
disputed claims about the talks, the U.S. is also sending more combat troops to West Asia in 
preparation for a possible ground attack. 
Mr. Trump appears to have no easy exit. The Strait of Hormuz was open before he launched the war. 
Ending the conflict now while the waterway remains under Iranian control would seem like a defeat. The 
U.S. had a robust military footprint in the region. Today, most American bases in the Gulf have been 
battered. In Iran, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei's assassination voided his fatwa against the nuclear bomb, 
and its parliament is considering withdrawing from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. Crude prices, 
under $80 a barrel before the war, are now hovering around $114 a barrel. Iran, which was under heavy 
sanctions, is making more money now because of the wartime sanctions relief. This war is already a 
disaster for the U.S., and Mr. Trump would worsen it by sending ground troops. The U.S. has not 
mobilised enough combat troops to launch a large-scale ground invasion. Many argue that the U.S. 
could try to seize some islands in the Gulf for leverage, but any attack would be extremely risky for both 
troops and the global economy. Mr. Trump's escalatory rhetoric, including threats to strike Iran's civilian 
infrastructure only underscores his desperation. Instead of digging deeper into the hole he has put 
himself in, he must start looking for a way out. A ground attack would close even the few remaining off-
ramps he has. 
P