Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 214

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Transient 
A. lukewarm 
2. Grave 
B. troubled 
3. Distressed 
C. pressure 
4. Strain 
D. temporary 
5. Tepid 
E. serious 
Answer: 
1- D 
2- E 
3- B 
4- C 
5- A 

            Cash, clash, clay: On the French Open 2026 
The French Open starts amid a dispute over prize money 
In the Open Era (from 1968), only six men have won each of the four tennis Majors at least once. 
Rod Laver achieved it in a single breathtaking year in 1969; Andre Agassi, Rafael Nadal, Roger 
Federer and Novak Djokovic toiled long and hard, ranging from five years to more than eight; 
Carlos Alcaraz completed it early this February in less than three years and five months. At the 
latest French Open, however, World No. 1 Jannik Sinner can shade all except Laver by being the 
quickest after the legendary Aussie - in under two years and five months since winning his first at the 
2024 Australian Open. The stars have aligned well for Sinner to hoist the Coupe des Mousquetaires 
and banish the bad memories from 12 months ago when he missed three championship points versus 
Alcaraz. He is on an awe-inspiring streak of 29 match wins and has swept all three ATP Masters 1000 
competitions on clay leading in. The 24-year-old's generational rival Alcaraz - whom he met in three 
Slam finals in 2025 - is missing because of a wrist injury, and Alexander Zverev, the second seed, has 
lost his previous nine contests to the Italian.  
Djokovic, 39 and a record 24-time Major champion, is undercooked, having played just four times since 
This worthy runner-up finish at the Australian Open. There is no such overwhelming favourite among 
women, with Aryna Sabalenka, Iga Swiatek, Coco Gauff and Elena Rybakina all fancied. World No. 1 
Sabalenka, who lost a topsy-turvy summit clash to Gauff in 2025, has reached semifinals or better in 12 
of her last 13 Slams. But she is without a final on clay this season, a first such occurrence since 2020. 
Swiatek is a four-time Roland-Garros titlist, and will look to reclaim her kingdom with some help from 
Francisco Roig, a coach who was once part of 14-time winner Nadal's team. Gauff was a finalist in Rome 
recently, but has lifted just one trophy since her Paris success. Rybakina, champion in Melbourne, is 
capable, but dirt is her least-preferred surface. No. 7 Elina Svitolina is a contender, having overcome 
both Swiatek and Gauff in Rome for her biggest title after returning from a maternity break in April 2023. 
Mirra Andreeva, 19 and seeded eighth, boasts of two finals, a semifinal and a quarterfinal from her last 
four events. However, the setting for this high-quality fare is less than ideal, for players are miffed at the 
French Open organisers - and other Majors by extension - for denying a larger share of the 
tournament revenue as prize money. An amicable settlement that would help lower ranked youngsters 
is essential for the long-term health of the sport. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Toiled 
A. irritated 
2. Miffed 
B. famed 
3. Amicable 
C. eliminate 
4. Legendary 
D. labored 
5. Banish 
E. friendly 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            From black to grey: on the Sample Registration System - Statistical Report, 2024 
India needs to prepare for a future with an ageing population 
f India wanted proof of its shifting demographic status, then the latest SRS bulletin, 2024 has 
provided just that. The figures from the Sample Registration System - Statistical Report, 2024, 
offer incontrovertible proof - falling fertility rate, low crude birth rate to show that India's pace of 
population growth is considerably slowing down. While the pundits predict at least three decades 
of population growth for the country, the plunging fertility rate certainly commands pause for 
contemplation and forward planning, for India to crest a crisis that several nations are struggling to 
manage. India's Total Fertility Rate has dropped to 1.9, lower than the re-placement level of 2.1, aided, in 
large, by a falling birth rate. As per the latest SRS data, India's birth rate fell from 21 in 2014 to 18.3 in 
2024; while death rate marginally went down from 6.7 to 6.4. The country is well on its way from 
population 'explosion' to one of ageing population and shrinking workforce expansion. India might still 
reap its demographic dividend - the median age in India is 29.2 years, in stark contrast to China (median 
age of 40.2), and several other European nations. In 2026, India has approximately 370 to 380 million 
youth, aged 15-29 years, representing roughly 27% of the country's population. Estimates also put 
India's below 35 years population at over 65% of the total, making it one of the world's youngest 
cohorts. 
In demographic terms, falling birth rate reflects a decline in fertility, linked to factors such as urbanisation, 
better education, access to contraception, and the desire for smaller families. India's high life expectancy 
at birth (72 years) and dipping death rate offer the other side of the transition paradigm, implying better 
access to health care. India needs to reassess the path ahead and pivot to prepare for the needs of a 
future greying nation, when the demographic dividend disappears. The SRS data, however, flags a 
more immediate concern too one of vast regional and rural/urban disparities. Overall, performance in 
rural areas is not on a par with the urban centres, and the southern States continue to stay ahead of the 
northern States. Overall, child survival improvements are real (the Infant Mortality Rate has fallen to 24) 
but high-burden States in the north are still at a much higher IMR. States and areas that lag will need 
targeted interventions, whether it is access to health care, awareness or education facilities to effect a 
national convergence. 
I