Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 154

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Remnant 
A. flooding 
2. Waterlogging 
B. intrusion 
3. Endeavour 
C. clearing 
4. Encroachment 
D. residue 
5. Desilting 
E. effort 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Cyber crackdown: On the investigation into cyber-crime 
Tackling digital arrest scams also needs global action 
The Supreme Court's direction to the CBI to conduct a pan-India investigation into cyber-
crimes, and "digital arrest" scams in particular, might seem extraordinary, as such directions 
normally require State government consent. But by doing so, the Court has acknowledged the 
severity of the menace that transcends State jurisdictions and boundaries. The Court's 
prioritization of the "digital arrest" scam - fraudsters impersonate police or government 
officials in a video call, falsely accuse victims of crimes, and pressure them to transfer money to avoid 
arrest - is fully warranted. The government has estimated that this scam, which often targets senior 
citizens, has resulted in losses exceeding ₹3,000 crore. The Court has asked the CBI to target not just 
the scammers but also banking officials who facilitate the creation of "mule" accounts. This is necessary 
as these scams depend on a malleable financial architecture and therefore require the intervention of 
agencies such as the RBI, which has also been instructed by the Court to employ Artificial Intelligence 
and Machine Learning to trace the "layering" of proceeds through multiple accounts. The Court has also 
asked online intermediaries to cooperate with the CBI, invoking the IT Rules 2021. The Court is also 
right in asking the CBI to investigate other scams such as investment schemes and part-time job scams, 
subsequently. 
The severity of cyber frauds, as National Crime Records Bureau data indicate, has risen significantly. 
However, while the judiciary and domestic policing can address the symptoms within India, the problem 
has another dimension - it is also transnational. The burgeoning of "scam centres" - compounds 
where trafficked workers, unable to escape due to violence, confiscated documents or debt bondage, 
are forced to run online fraud operations - in conflict-ridden zones of Southeast Asia suggests that the 
solution requires robust international diplomacy. The U.S., for instance, has established a Scam Center 
Strike Force to tackle the issue. Furthermore, Myanmar remains a hotbed for these operations, primarily 
because the illegally ruling junta benefits from taxing the proceeds of such crimes. Tackling this requires 
moving beyond bilateral requests. New Delhi must act in cohesion with ASEAN and the UN to sanction 
the illegal regime and cut off the financial lifelines of these modern-day slavery sweatshops. 
Domestically, the battle must also be fought on the grounds of digital literacy and capacity. As daily life 
and governance become increasingly digitised, there remains a glaring deficit in cyber awareness among 
the population. States, local administrations, and the RBI must launch widespread awareness 
campaigns. Simultaneously, there is an urgent need to upgrade the digital capabilities of State police. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Intrusive 
A. prison 
2. Spoofed 
B. critical 
3. Sophistication 
C. forged 
4. Panopticon 
D. interfering 
5. Urgent 
E. complexity 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- E 
4- A 
5- B 

            Sting in the tail: on Cyclone Ditwah, its impact 
Ditwah devastated Sri Lanka, and exposed infrastructure gaps in India 
uring its slow crawl over Sri Lanka in November, Cyclone Ditwah was a rain machine that 
repeatedly swept over the same areas for days, eventually precipitating a national disaster 
with widespread flooding. Fourteen lakh people were affected, and at least 474 were killed. 
After crossing Sri Lanka, the system re-entered the Bay of Bengal and briefly reintensified, 
bringing heavy rains to north Tamil Nadu and south Andhra Pradesh. By December 1, the 
storm's remnant parked itself off Chennai's coast as a deep depression. The next day, after around 18 
cm of rain over 24 hours, the city woke to flooded streets and widespread waterlogging. While that 
much rain would test any urban drainage system, public frustration has mounted. That Ditwah was tricky 
to predict made matters worse. Chennai's storm water network has been rebuilt and extended after the 
2015 floods, and again since 2023, but it cannot be flood-proof. Integrated projects in local basins are 
designed to handle intense bursts rather than hours of heavy rain. The GCC has said that it has spent 
₹5,200 crore over four years to add around 1,100 km of new drains, with three-fourths of the work done. 
A separate endeavour to fix smaller broken links is incomplete, leaving many streets waterlogged. 
Chennai's flat layout, increasing paved area, and the three rivers running through it from catchments in 
Tiruvallur and Kancheepuram also mean that when a storm system inundates those basins and 
Chennai together, water levels will rise quickly. Recent floods in north Chennai exposed the 
encroachment and shoddy desilting of the Kosasthalaiyar. With its ability to tolerate flooding 
diminished, the GCC had to shut some drains and pump stagnant waters against reverse flow. By 
lingering near Chennai, the new storm had similar effects. 
The Thiruppugazh Committee appointed after the 2021 floods produced a 600-page report with basin-
wise recommendations and numerous measures. The State government has cited this report while 
justifying design changes and drain upgrades, building artificial water bodies, and seeking central funds 
for an 'Integrated Urban Flood Management' project, yet the report remains out of public view. There is 
also no verifiable consolidated implementation plan with a deadline. Flood maps and elevation models 
exist for the Chennai basin but they are not a shared reference for enforcement and relief efforts, while 
proper zoning and limits on construction continue to elude residents. Thus, the rains underline an 
unresolved story while spotlighting gaps in infrastructure and transparency. As the upgrades take shape, 
the State must publish the report and ensure hazard maps and basin-wide coordination efforts as well as 
temporary solutions such as pumps keep pace with the storms that routinely test them. 
D