Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 244

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Consistent 
A. stressed 
2. Headwinds 
B. relief 
3. Ripples 
C. regular 
4. Respite 
D. waves 
5. Strained 
E. obstacles 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- D 
4- B 
5- A 

            A healthy tax: On taxing foods high in fat, sugar and salt 
The government must act to tax foods high in fat, sugar, and salt 
India, which has a long history of addressing the challenges of undernutrition, has to pivot to attack 
the curious phenomenon of overnutrition that evolving lifestyles have now laid at its door. The 
recent National Family Health Survey data showed that in India, while stunting and undernutrition 
continue to be cause for concern, despite some gains, the sharp rise in adult overweight and 
obesity, besides diet-related metabolic conditions, cannot be ignored any more. Two unrelated 
developments have advanced the question of unhealthy diets in very pointed suggestions that would 
nudge consumers to make the right choices. First, a Parliamentary Standing Committee has 
recommended mandatory front-of-pack nutrition labelling indicating whether packaged food products 
are high in sugar, and second, a national consortium has advised the government to levy a health tax 
on high fat, salt and sugar foods, and enforce stricter regulations on their advertisements. The Standing 
Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution also made a recommendation to include 
the sugar content in baby foods, attacking the excess sugar consumption issue right where it begins. 
The consortium on adolescent nutrition, which goes by the practical name Let's Fix Our Food, is led by 
the Indian Council of Medical Research-National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR-NIN), and comprising 
several other prominent institutions in India and abroad, has recommended that the government 
ensure a healthier school food environment, stricter regulation of marketing of unhealthy food, and 
front-of-pack nutrition labelling. These efforts will be among the steps to tackle the rising burden of 
obesity and diet-related non communicable diseases that require a comprehensive strategy helmed by 
the government. 
According to the World Health Organization, since 2017, at least 133 countries have increased or 
introduced a new health tax. A "junk food law" came into force in Colombia in 2023, to tackle the high 
consumption of packaged foods. An additional tax on such foods began at 10%, rose to 15% the next 
year and touched 20% the subsequent year. Norway, Hungary, Denmark, Bermuda, Dominica, St. 
Vincent and the Grenadines, and the Navajo Nation (U.S.), have also specifically implemented taxes on 
unprocessed sugar and sugar-added foods. With the ICMR-NIN report indicating that over 17 million 
children and adolescents are affected by obesity, and that this number can cross 27 million by 2030, 
there cannot be a better time to act on these suggestions that will go a long way in educating the 
consumer to make healthy food choices. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Oversight 
A. danger 
2. Fraught 
B. crumbled 
3. Evacuated 
C. supervision 
4. Collapsed 
D. shifted 
5. Hazard 
E. troubled 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- D 
4- B 
5- A 

            Proof of life: On the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill 2026 
Bureaucratic paperwork must not result in exclusion 
The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill 2026 passed in the Lok Sabha 
amends Section 13(3) of the 1969 Act. In the updated framework, registrations delayed for 
up to two years still require a district, a subdivisional or an authorised executive magistrate's 
order, but when the delay exceeds two years, a judicial magistrate is required to verify the 
event and pass an order. The 2023 amendment rendered birth certificates the principal, in 
fact near-conclusive, proof of date and place of birth for school admission, voter rolls and applications for 
passport, Aadhaar, driving licence and government jobs. [L] It also [P] share the Centre and States to 
[Q] create digital databases, and required them to [R] allowed data with the Registrar General. As the 
certificate's gatekeeping power grew, so did the incentive to obtain one fraudulently, leading to the 2026 
amendment. However, the Bill's passage lacked debate in the Lok Sabha as the Opposition was 
protesting the July 20 police crackdown on the CJP protests. Since identity documents have also 
become more politically sensitive, moving potentially more contentious cases into courts insulates the 
administration from accusations that it is arbitrarily granting or refusing documentation. But while 
judicial scrutiny places the decision at arm's length from the executive, erroneous decisions could 
prove more difficult for disadvantaged applicants to rectify. 
The amendment also leaves the evidentiary rules unchanged. If the government believed executive 
magistrates were approving suspicious applications because the evidentiary standards were too lax, it 
could have prescribed more rigorous documentation, but it has not. Further, how the risk of fraudulent 
registrations rises after two years is unclear; the government has also not published evidence justifying a 
judicial magistrate's intervention at two years or whether it considered less burdensome alternatives. 
For now, it appears to be a compromise based possibly on shorter delays being common enough for 
administrative responses to resolve. Registrations are also not infrequently delayed for valid reasons, for 
example because they transpired in remote areas, or undocumented migrants realised a need for 
educational certificates. But when identity documents become indispensable to access state support, 
the government's policy instinct has been to raise the documents' level of assurance rather than render 
them more accessible. In the same vein, the amendment may further a broader philosophy that, in 
pursuit of bureaucratic certainty, treats the wrongful exclusion of legitimate citizens as an acceptable 
price to minimise the risk of wrongful inclusion. [M] This trade-off is backed [A]/ by sufficient evidence 
[B]/ to clarify whether [C]/ and the Rajya Sabha [D]/ must debate the Bill. [E] 
T