Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 189

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Enormous 
A. weak 
2. Leverage 
B. wise 
3. Vulnerable 
C. advantage 
4. Articulate 
D. very large 
5. Prudent 
E. express clearly 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Band aid: On the Supreme Court and the Special Intensive Revision process 
The constitutionality of the flawed SIR process must be decided quickly 
ith the corrections and claims process coming to an end, the Special Intensive 
Revision (SIR) process has seen the release of final electoral rolls except in West 
Bengal and Uttar Pradesh which are due soon. The net number of voters removed 
(with fresh additions) from the pre-SIR electoral rolls in States such as Tamil Nadu 
(nearly 11.5%), Gujarat (13.4%) and Chhattisgarh (11.8%) remain high. Tamil Nadu 
and Gujarat are, after all, net in-migrant States unlike Bihar where deletions were around 6%. The high 
number of deletions, and the fact that excisions are higher for female than male electors, suggests that 
the SIR process, as envisaged and implemented by the Election Commission of India (ECI), suffered 
from clear structural defects. A clear-cut assessment could have only been possible with comparison 
with Census figures, but due to the prolonged delay by the Bharatiya Janata Party-led Union 
Government, only outdated numbers from 2011 are available. The final figures of the electorate in 
major States where the SIR was conducted indicate that the registered adult population in the final rolls 
is much below the projected estimates. This again raises the question of whether the ECI should have 
waited for the Census before rushing the SIR - but that is now only of academic interest. 
The exercise's lacunae and anomalies could have been mitigated if the Supreme Court of India had 
ruled on SIR's constitutionality and compelled the ECI to adopt a more robust - though slower - 
household-by-household count, instead of depending on an enumeration that shifts the burden onto 
electors to prove their eligibility. This exercise has clearly, and unduly, affected migrant voters - 
especially those leaving their residence for the short term and married women who have shifted 
residences. By letting the process to continue despite its frailties, the Court relied on the ECI's claim that 
concerns with omissions are overblown, given the relatively few complaints filed by political parties. 
But the fact that political parties participate in a zero-sum game of competition should alert to the 
possibility of their relative lack of agency in assisting all electors to be part of the list. Also, unlike other 
identity documents such as ration card, passport or Aadhaar, the voter identity card is of use only during 
quinquennial elections, disincentivising citizens from trying to ensure that they are on the list. This is 
even more so in West Bengal, where the ECI's shoddy implementation has created such a humongous 
mess that the Court has sought the services of not just the State's judicial officers but those of its 
neighbours to aid in the "legal verification" process. The Court is seeking to ease the hurt rather than aid 
the process of universal adult franchise. 
W


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Mitigated 
A. forced 
2. Prolonged 
B. faulty 
3. Compelled 
C. obsolete 
4. Flawed 
D. extended 
5. Outdated 
E. lessened 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            A jab well done: On India's Human Papillomavirus vaccination programme 
Following up of adverse events after immunisation is a must 
India's move to introduce a nationwide Human Papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination programme, for 
girls aged 14, strikes a strident note for science at a time when an anti-vaccination sentiment has 
perilously picked up favourable winds, globally. The impact of shunning vaccines is apparent in 
the United States where, currently, a measles epidemic is making its way across 26 States. The 
HPV vaccination will be conducted exclusively at designated government health facilities, and in 
the presence of trained medical officers, supported by skilled health-care teams equipped for post-
vaccination observation and management of adverse events following immunisation (AEFI). A single-
dose vaccine, a regimen recommended by the World Health Organization, will be deployed. Adequate 
evidence exists to show that almost all cases of cervical cancer are caused by persistent infection with 
high-risk types of HPV, particularly 16 and 18. These two types together account for more than 80% of 
cervical cancer cases in India. Evidence also points to the fact that cervical cancer is largely preventable 
through HPV vaccination and regular screening, and can be cured if detected early and treated 
promptly. Globally, over 90 countries are implementing single-dose HPV vaccination schedules. Several 
countries have demonstrated substantial reductions in HPV infection, pre-cancerous lesions, and 
cervical cancer incidence following widespread vaccination. Cervical cancer remains a rare cancer 
where a vaccine has proven to be of great preventive value. 
The sheer burden of cervical cancer in India is what makes this decision a critical life-saving 
intervention: The South-East Asia Region (SEARO) accounts for the second-highest cervical cancer 
incident (new cases) and death rate among WHO regions, with India contributing over 65% of the 
burden. The second most common cancer in women in India, it was estimated that the country had 
127,526 new cases and 79,906 deaths from cervical cancer in 2022. National screening coverage 
remains alarmingly low, with only 1.9% of women aged 30-49 being tested. However, India's dark past 
with an HPV vaccine trial cannot be forgotten. Seven girls who were part of a trial in 2009-10 in Andhra 
Pradesh and Gujarat died. An ICMR investigation averred that the reasons "were most probably 
unrelated to the vaccine. However, the cause of death in all the cases cannot be established with 
certainty". It also flagged, as a key concern, the need to identify and investigate all AEFI. As the 
government embarks on this exercise that could lead to many health gains, it will do well to ensure a 
working cold chain to store the vaccines, complete transparency, and meticulous reporting of AEFI 
across the country. 
I