Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 248

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Clinch 
A. remarkable 
2. Notable 
B. pushed 
3. Propelled 
C. impressive 
4. Podium 
D. secure 
5. Spectacular 
E. stage 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- B 
4- E 
5- C 

            Tracking nursing: On the Nurses Registration and Tracking System 
A fully updated live nurses portal will be of immense benefit to the nation 
or a country where the human resources in health care will always fall short of the 
recommended patient-professional ratio, it is important to make sure that every single 
resource is harnessed. However, government data tabled in the Lok Sabha have shown that 
the Nurses Registration and Tracking System, created over seven years ago, has 
registered less than a third of the total nurses in the country. Only 14.24 lakh of the 46.02 lakh 
registered nursing personnel have been enrolled, leaving 31.78 lakh outside the national system. Clearly, 
the move to create an accurate national registry and streamline registration-related services on a single 
platform for all nurses is far from yielding satisfactory results. There are also stark regional disparities, 
and unexpected performances with the large southern States (Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Andhra 
Pradesh) figuring among the laggers, while Bihar, Jharkhand and Odisha show between 80%-99% 
enrolment rates. The Indian Nursing Council has attributed the delays to issues rooted in jurisdiction, and 
federal tension, on the grounds that primary registration is legally the responsibility of individual State 
Nursing Registration Councils. [P] To receive a National Unique Identity card [1]/ verification by their 
respective [2]/ State Nursing Councils [3]/ and nurse passbook, [4]/ nurses rely on [5]. Further, the 
charge is that several State councils have resisted migrating fully to the central portal and continue 
operating independent parallel systems. 
Poor nurse registration - irrespective of whether it is caused by incomplete digital tracking systems, 
outdated State registries, delayed licensing, or regional autonomy - has widespread consequences 
across health-care systems, apart from personally affecting nurses. For nurses, there will be delays in 
sanctioning their requests for inter-State transfer and credential verification for overseas employment. 
For the nation, without a centralised live registry that can provide a true measure of how many nurses 
(with specialisations) are available where, there might be artificial surpluses or deficits on paper, leading 
to less-than-ideal deployment of resources, and implementation of policy decisions. Fragmented 
registries also make it easy for unverified individuals, impersonators, or personnel with revoked 
licences to practise using fraudulent credentials, thus compromising patient safety. A live tracker would 
be of utmost use during public health emergencies - including disease outbreaks and natural disasters. 
Else, it could be impossible for state agencies to track, mobilise or deploy specialised nursing personnel 
to high-alert zones. Given the crucial complementary role, and in some areas, even the primary role 
that nurses play in the health-care system, efforts must be made to ensure that all nurses are brought 
into the portal. 
F


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Unanimously 
A. foreign 
2. Specify 
B. eagerness 
3. Opaque 
C. unclear 
4. Zeal 
D. detail 
5. Abroad 
E. collectively 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- C 
4- B 
5- A 

            A predictable rise: On inflation 
Inflation will remain high in the foreseeable future 
 rise in India's July retail inflation was a foregone conclusion, but its modest increase, at 
4.45%, up from 4.38% in June, is still the highest in 19 months, since December 2024. This 
is the second consecutive month that retail inflation has stayed above the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI)'s 4% target, even while remaining comfortably within its 2%-6% tolerance range. 
Predictably, it has again been driven by food, fuel and transport, even as core inflation, 
excluding precious metals, has remained below 3%. What is telling is the extent of rural, food-led 
inflation, which rose from 5.45% in June to 5.79% in July, while urban food inflation decreased marginally 
from 5.09% to 5.05%. Staples such as onion (22.54%), garlic (35.36%) and ginger (83.62%) fuelled the 
rise, even as potato (-16.56%) and tomato (-4.59%) moderated. Transport, however, continues to have a 
wider impact, pointing to elevated input-cost pressures. Transport inflation quickened to 4.43% in July 
from 4.31% in June, while the crucial subdivision, transport services for goods, rose from 7.70% to 
7.77%. Despite the July 1 cut in commercial LPG prices of about ₹183, food and beverage serving 
services inflation quickened to 7.75% in July, indicating that restaurants are yet to recoup revenues and 
margins lost following the steep operating costs from March through May. Commercial LPG was cut by a 
further ₹202 on August 1, but this is unlikely to immediately bring down menu prices. 
The monsoon remains a concern, with parts of western, central and southern India remaining rain-
deficient. Precious metals inflation, particularly gold (32.98%) and silver (109.84%), moderated, but 
remains extraordinarily high. Crude prices were relatively stable during the July CPI reference period, 
but began rising again in August. More worryingly, Ukraine-related disruptions around Russia's Black 
Sea export infrastructure, particularly Novorossiysk, could raise freight and risk premiums for Russian 
crude. Russia supplied nearly half of India's crude imports in June, making such disruptions relevant to 
India's landed energy costs. The rupee also depreciated by about 1.6% between the June 15 and July 
15 CPI reference dates, further amplifying imported inflation. In the background, there are signs of 
weakening economic momentum, with the HSBC composite PMI showing a sharp fall from 57.1 in June 
to 54.3 in July, its weakest expansion since March 2022. While the PMI is a high-frequency indicator 
and need not reflect a long-term trend, it is nevertheless worth taking note of. The RBI's Monetary 
Policy Committee, which held the repo rate at 5.25% for the fourth consecutive meeting in August, is 
therefore likely to remain on hold through the second quarter of FY27, as it weighs persistent supply-
side inflation against weakening economic momentum. 
A