Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 191

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Consistent 
A. addition 
2. Critical 
B. regular 
3. Dearth 
C. limited 
4. Scant 
D. shortage 
5. Adjunct 
E. crucial 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- D 
4- C 
5- A 

            Imperial war: on the war against Iran 
American and Israeli thuggery has no place in the international system 
onald Trump came to the White House promising to end America's endless wars. That 
promise now lies in ashes in West Asia. The far-right Republican, who, along with Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, launched an all-out war against Iran on February 28 
and killed its Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has proved to be one of the most 
reckless warmongers ever to occupy the Oval Office. Blood is on the hands of these two 
men - one a mercurial hard nationalist who is turning America into a rogue superpower, and the other, 
an expansionist ethnonationalist wanted for war crimes by the International Criminal Court. Mr. Trump 
has bombed at least seven countries in the 13 months that he has been in office. Under Mr. Netanyahu, 
Israel has operated far outside the boundaries of international law. Iran has responded with missile and 
drone attacks, targeting Israeli and American bases in the Persian Gulf and Jordan, that risks widening 
the war. Tehran has also announced the closure of the critical Strait of Hormuz, a move that risks a 
global economic fallout, especially for major oil importers such as India. 
To be clear, this is not a "pre-emptive" war, as Israel has claimed. There was no evidence that Iran was 
preparing to launch an attack. On the contrary, Tehran was involved in serious negotiations with 
Washington under Omani mediation. On February 27, Oman's Foreign Minister Badr al-Busaidi said 
that a deal was within reach, based on Iran's commitment not to build a bomb or stockpile nuclear 
material. Within hours, American and Israeli missiles struck Iran, killing its head of state and top leaders. 
This is not the first time that diplomacy has been overtaken by force. In 2018, Mr. Trump single-
handedly sabotaged the 2015 nuclear agreement. In June 2025, while Iran was negotiating with the 
U.S., Israel launched a unilateral attack, triggering the 12-day war. This time, however, the attack is far 
more dangerous. This war is not about giving Iranians their "freedom" either, as Mr. Trump has claimed. 
The U.S. maintains close ties with several repressive monarchies and dictatorships, where freedom 
rarely enters the equation. Nor has Washington shown any qualms about Israel's crimes against the 
defenceless, stateless Palestinian people. This is a war of choice, launched to eliminate an adversary 
and reshape the region to suit American and Israeli interests. Such thuggery cannot be accepted in the 
international system. The war machines of the imperial duo have already wrecked the region. Before 
the fire spreads further, this war must end. America should step back and Israel must be reined in. 
Otherwise, even the last vestige of the rules-based order will be shredded entirely. 
D


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Cheer 
A. estimate 
2. Predict 
B. joy 
3. Peg 
C. particularly 
4. Blithely 
D. forecast 
5. Notably 
E. carefree 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- C 

            A reboot: On Canada-India ties 
Canada under Carney is undoing the damage of the Trudeau years 
India and Canada have had to take a painstaking path to reset ties ruptured over the Nijjar killing 
in 2023. But this week saw a big step forward, with Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney's India 
visit and his talks with Prime Minister Narendra Modi. The process began last year, after the exit of 
former Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, who had publicly accused India of involvement in 
the killing, and by Mr. Carney's entry and invitation to Mr. Modi to attend the G-7 outreach in 
Kananaskis, Canada. The two countries have since demonstrated that they can resolve deep 
differences on security issues; NSA Ajit Doval's Ottawa visit last month, previously unthinkable, saw 
a closer understanding of each other's positions on the Khalistan issue and foreign interference. High 
Commissioners were appointed in both countries, and the two sides restarted discussions on the 
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) and cooperation in other spheres. Mr. 
Carney's visit and rapport with Mr. Modi have also been forged due to geopolitical factors. U.S. 
President Donald Trump's unilateral moves on trade and tariffs, and foreign policy, have pushed most 
global players to diversify their engagements and essay partners they may not have in the past. In a 
more realpolitik phase, India and Canada have restored ties with China, although fraught with 
misgivings over China's trade and supply chain control. Finally, Mr. Carney's January speech at Davos, 
exhorting "middle powers" and multilateralism against great power moves, resonated in India. It is 
pertinent that Mr. Carney, who landed in India just as the U.S.-Israel attacked Iran, continued with his 
meetings in India before travelling to Australia and Japan. 
In Delhi, India and Canada agreed to the terms of reference for the CEPA, with the aim to conclude the 
trade deal this year, and a 10-year agreement for Canadian uranium supplies for Indian nuclear reactors. 
They also decided to build partnerships in renewable energy, technology and innovation, while 
establishing a defence dialogue. But turning the chapter on a history of bad blood that has bedevilled 
ties since the 1970s, mainly over the Khalistan issue, however, will need more clarity and trust. Just 
before the meet in Delhi, media reports in Canada, clearly fuelled by Canadian intelligence inputs of 
Indian links to the Nijjar case and other instances of foreign interference, indicated an internal tussle 
within the Canadian government on these issues. While the joint statement skirted around the issues in 
India-Canada accusations over extremist groups and transnational repression, these will come to the 
fore again if left unaddressed, especially as Canadian authorities move towards the trial in the Nijjar 
case. A successful partnership will require more honest conversations and mutual respect in public 
dealings on differences between them. 
I