Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 167

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Commendable 
A. reduce 
2. Rejig 
B. undesirable 
3. Pare down 
C. bolster 
4. unenviable 
D. admirable 
5. Pad up 
E. reorganize 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            High and dry: On gig workers, social security 
Social security for gig workers needs to be made accessible and secure in practice 
The day after the strike by a lakh or so gig workers across India on December 31, the CEO of 
one platform commended police intervention to help the platform meet demand. This 
backdrop was unmissable shortly after the Labour Ministry had published draft Rules to 
operationalize the refreshed labour codes for public consultation. According to the Rules, 
these workers will be inducted into the new framework only on social security, not on wages 
or working conditions, rendering their strike more urgent. While the Code on Wages will apply across 
sectors and job categories, it excludes gig work from an 'employment' relationship for wage purposes. 
Instead, it is being treated as distinct and the platform is only obligated to make a gross contribution to a 
social security fund. The workers' demands, including over algorithmic rate cuts and opaque incentive 
structures, thus remain unaddressed. Similarly, the OSH&WC (Central) Rules are built around employer 
compliance via the Shram Suvidha Portal, but this is a conventional model that does not address 
concerns of app-mediated work. Only the social security changes are concrete. The draft Rules here 
require gig workers to register on a portal and every aggregator to upload details of engaged workers 
and update them every quarter. The Centre may also notify additional eligibility conditions; in any case, a 
worker must have engaged for at least 90 days with an aggregator or 120 cumulative days across 
aggregators in the financial year. 
However, one calendar day can count as multiple days if a worker earns via multiple aggregators that 
day: if this helps workers qualify faster, it does not constrain platforms on how they organise work. The 
windows could also penalise workers for care-giving work or those responding to a demand slump 
beyond their control. To these ends, the draft Rules need to be redesigned so that the social security 
they promise is accessible and secure in practice. For instance, the 90- and 120-day thresholds must 
include explicit protections for illness, maternity and demand collapses, and should not lapse because a 
worker had a bad quarter. The Rules should also specify what benefits exist, how disputes will be 
resolved, the minimum benefits the Social Security Fund will support, and a time-bound claims and 
appeals process not dependent on platforms' goodwill. Finally, aggregators should give every worker a 
periodic statement of jobs, hours logged, earnings and deductions, and workers must be able to contest 
irregular data. Without these changes, the new regime will leave the insecurity that produced the strikes 
structurally intact. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Exemplary 
A. misfortune 
2. Contaminated 
B. paradox 
3. Tragedy 
C. polluted 
4. Irony 
D. outstanding 
5. Mishap 
E. disaster 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Unenviable choice: On the government's fiscal policy space 
Growth-generating capital expenditure can affect fiscal targets 
The Goods and Services Tax (GST) revenue of ₹1.74 lakh crore in December 2025 confirms 
just how narrow the government's fiscal policy space is. The December data reflect the 
economic activity in November, the second month under the new, reduced GST rates. 
December's revenues were marginally higher than the ₹1.7 lakh crore collected in November. 
This was expected. Any belief that the rate reductions would lead to an immediate and 
sustained increase in demand, and hence GST collections, was pure optimism. In reality, people are 
more likely to use that extra money to pad up savings or pare down debt, with increased consumption a 
more medium-term outcome. This happened following the income-tax rejig in Budget 2025 too, when the 
government effectively exempted people earning up to ₹12 lakh a year from income-tax. The GST and 
income-tax decisions were both welcome relaxations. However, at least for this year, they are going to 
cause the government more pain than gain. The most recent data on the government's accounts reflect 
this. Total tax revenue stood at ₹13.9 lakh crore at the end of November 2025, 3.4% lower than in the 
same period of 2024-25. On the other hand, the Centre's capital expenditure stood at ₹6.58 lakh crore in 
the April-November 2025 period, 28% higher than in the same period of the previous year. This jump in 
capital expenditure was balanced out by a much slower growth in revenue expenditure of 2.1%. 
However, of the two types of spending, the government has much less discretion over revenue 
expenditure, which comprises expenses such as salaries, pensions and interest on loans. These cannot 
be kept subdued for long. 
The government has valiantly tried to bolster its earnings through the new excise and GST rates on 
tobacco products, not to mention the health and security cess on the manufacture of pan masala. 
However, since all these new rates and cesses will come into effect only on February 1, their full benefit 
will be felt only in the next financial year. Yet, the troubles for the government's finances do not end 
there. The remarkably low levels of wholesale inflation this year - averaging -0.08% so far - have 
also meant that the size of the nominal GDP would likely be smaller than initially budgeted. This means 
that several ratios pegged to it, most pertinently the fiscal deficit and debt-GDP, would automatically 
come in larger than earlier estimated. The Centre has displayed commendable fiscal discipline over the 
last few years. However, this year, it has placed before itself the unenviable choice of either pulling back 
on growth-generating capital expenditure, or risking missing its fiscal targets. 
T