Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 180

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Staggered 
A. optional 
2. Tweak 
B. phased 
3. Discretionary 
C. modification 
4. Anticipated 
D. maintained 
5. Retained 
E. expected 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- C 
3- A 
4- E 
5- D 

            End in sight: On the U.S.-India trade deal, America's tariffs 
The U.S. trade deal gives hope that the tariffs ordeal may be over soon 
ews of the India-United States trade deal has brought palpable relief to a lot of Indian 
industries, but it also comes with persistent and important questions that remain 
unanswered despite a press statement by India's Commerce Minister Piyush Goyal. The 
initial announcement, through social media, while true to U.S. President Donald Trump's 
form, also marks a departure for India and Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Past trade deal 
announcements have all been made through more formal channels. The announcement of U.S. tariffs 
on Indian imports being cut to 18% from the existing 50% is certainly welcome. However, as of now, 
there is no clarity on when this would be implemented. While Mr. Trump said they would be cut 
"immediately", Mr. Goyal said that the details will be shared "soon". There is also considerable 
ambiguity over whether this is the first tranche or 'mini-deal' of a larger Bilateral Trade Agreement, a 
limited deal affecting only tariffs, or something in between. Mr. Trump's assertion that Mr. Modi has 
"agreed to stop buying Russian oil" must also be addressed by the Indian government sooner rather 
than later. Mr. Goyal did not touch upon this in his statement. Stopping Russian oil entirely would not 
only force India to find alternatives for about a third of its oil imports but would also cast a shadow over 
its relations with Russia, which is a long-time friend and critical supplier of defence equipment. Such a 
move would announce a very definite realignment for India and, in that light, deserves to be discussed 
in Parliament first. Similarly, buying more Venezuelan crude comes with its own refining challenges. 
There is also the question of what India has committed to the U.S. in terms of tariff concessions, 
investments and purchase orders. Apart from making the assurance that sensitive agricultural items and 
dairy would be excluded, the government has been silent despite several significant assertions being 
made by Mr. Trump and his team. While the "final stages of detailing" are still to be completed, as Mr. 
Goyal has said, the light at the end of the tunnel has already buoyed Indian stock markets, bolstered 
the rupee, and brought especial cheer to labour-intensive sectors such as textiles, apparel, footwear, 
leather and engineering goods that had been hurting from the 50% tariffs. These sectors already stand to 
gain from the India-European Union trade deal, which Mr. Goyal has assured will come into effect this 
year. The tariffs they will face in the U.S. will likely still be slightly higher than those enjoyed by 
competitors in the South-East Asian countries due to their Most-Favoured Nation status. Yet, the new 
deal stands to certainly enhance their competitiveness, and the targeted announcements in the Union 
Budget 2026 should also help bridge this narrower gap. 
N


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Persistent 
A. happiness 
2. Buoyed 
B. perceptible 
3. Cheer 
C. portion 
4. Palpable 
D. encouraged 
5. Tranche 
E. continuous 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Generations apart: On the Australian Open, Djokovic-Alcaraz final 
Despite being separated by 16 years, Djokovic fought as an equal with Alcaraz 
ver since Carlos Alcaraz won his maiden Grand Slam title at the 2022 US Open and scaled 
the pinnacle of ATP rankings as a tender 19-year-old, he was said to be on a fast lane to 
success. On Sunday, with his first Australian Open singles crown and seventh Major overall, 
the Spaniard proved that those predictions were not ill-founded. The four-set triumph over 
the legendary Novak Djokovic drew Alcaraz level with greats such as John McEnroe and Mats 
Wilander in the all-time Slam tally. At 22 years, eight months and 28 days, Alcaraz is also the youngest 
to complete the career Grand Slam (acquiring all four Majors at least once), surpassing 22-time Slam 
winner Rafael Nadal's record of 24 years, three months and 10 days. Melbourne had long been Alcaraz's 
Achilles heel. He had not gone past the quarterfinals in four prior attempts, and this time, he had arrived 
Down Under without his long-term coach Juan Carlos Ferrero, from whom he recently split. But the 
World No.1 thrived, often under pressure, not just in the final where he fended off a resurgent Djokovic 
aiming for his 25th Major, but also in the semifinals where he battled from the brink - both tennis-wise 
and health-wise - to outlast Germany's Alexander Zverev in a five-hour, 27-minute humdinger. 
The fortnight also served as a timely reminder of Djokovic's enduring genius. The rousing four-hour, 
nine-minute semifinal victory over World No.2 and two-time defending champion Jannik Sinner - his 
first over the Italian in six attempts - showed that even at the grand old tennis age of 38, the Serb is 
among the very best. He may have benefitted from a walkover in the fourth round and a retirement in the 
quarterfinals, but what shone were his technical mastery and the ability to hit peak level when needed. 
Djokovic is now up to No. 3, and such is his recent record - four semifinals and a final in the last five 
Majors - that any talk of retirement appears incongruous. However, it will be in the best interest of 
men's tennis if a contemporary star can be unearthed to challenge the Alcaraz-Sinner duopoly than 
just depending on a seemingly timeless patriarch. The women's game does not suffer from such lacuna 
as Elena Rybakina captured her second Slam title - after Wimbledon 2022 - with a stunning three-set 
defeat of World No. 1 and four-time Major winner Aryna Sabalenka. The 26-year-old Kazakh is now 
ranked No. 3, and the fact that she beat No. 2 Iga Swiatek - who was on her own mission to achieve a 
career Slam - and No. 6 Jessica Pegula en route will halo her achievement.