Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 190

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Meticulous 
A. clear 
2. Lesions 
B. careful 
3. Sentiment 
C. complete 
4. Sheer 
D. wounds 
5. Apparent 
E. opinion 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- E 
4- C 
5- A 

            A brittle shell: On ISRO and transparency 
ISRO should choose transparency to reinforce public confidence 
 venerable institution, facing accusations of opacity, decided to stun its detractors with 
some transparency. The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) made public the 
report of a technical committee, constituted to analyse why the NVS-02 satellite, which was 
launched aboard a GSLV rocket on January 29, 2025, could not be placed in its intended 
orbit. Until this week, there was no official explanation why this had happened. An 
accompanying press statement - not a report it must be noted - surmised that an 'apex' committee 
had concluded that a signal meant to activate a key valve in the engine's oxidiser line never reached it. 
This valve is crucial for firing the engine to raise the spacecraft's orbit and this likely happened because 
at least one connection in the electrical connector - in both the primary and backup lines - came 
loose or failed, preventing the signal from getting through. All of this is useful information, but only for 
ISRO to be cautious in future missions. In fact, the press statement continued, these learnings were 
"successfully implemented" in a November 2, 2025 mission by the LVM-3 M5 launch vehicle that placed 
the GSAT-7R, India's heaviest communication satellite, in its intended orbit. When the ISRO releases a 
statement on an event from a year ago, it must strive to illuminate rather than be seen to declassify 
under duress. It should have revealed whether the connection came loose because of an oversight; 
whether multiple levels of personnel - or machines - who scrutinise every nut and screw on the 
assembly line failed, or if a manufacturing anomaly had compounded over time in a way that would have 
escaped detection even by the most vigilant overseers. 
At the other end, doing so reinforces public confidence in the institution. It should be able to reveal such 
information without blaming individuals or withholding proprietary or strategic information. Making such 
'Failure Analysis' reports public, as they are called, used to be a routine affair. However, ISRO seems to 
have retreated into a shell following the back-to-back failures of the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicles in 
January and in May 2025. In fact, beyond the technical committees- another committee has been set 
up to probe "systemic issues" underlying the failures of these rockets - ISRO should not choose 
insularity at a time when traditional business models all over the world are being disrupted. 
A


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Surmised 
A. delicate 
2. Brittle 
B. respected 
3. Illuminate 
C. pressure 
4. Duress 
D. assumed 
5. Venerable 
E. clarify 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- C 
5- B 

            Up in the air: On non-scheduled operators, aviation safety 
Flights by non-scheduled operators need better enforcement 
 series of flight incidents within a month - two crashes involving small aircraft, at 
Baramati (Maharashtra) in January, and near Simaria (Jharkhand), and a helicopter 
crashlanding in the Andamans - is a reminder that charter aviation in India cannot be 
treated as a lightly regulated adjunct to commercial flying. The troubled charter aviation 
sector is expanding and the need for oversight has become critical. The Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) website lists 133 non-scheduled operators, or NSOs (updated till 
September 30, 2025), using a mix of fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft. The meeting on February 24 
that the DGCA held with all NSO permit holders was thus long overdue. The proposal to rank charter 
operators based on safety performance and the requirement for NSOs to disclose critical safety 
information on their websites, which covers aircraft age, maintenance history, and pilot experience, 
could be the first steps towards basic transparency. Equally significant is the DGCA's line that 
commercial considerations must not be allowed to affect safety, a pointer to pressures to prioritise VIP 
schedules and even business commitments. The regulator's focus on maintenance standards, 
particularly among operators with in-house maintenance, repair, and operation facilities, is another 
critical, but late, intervention. Cockpit voice recorder audits, fuel records and ADS-B data scrutiny as 
well as enforcement of flight duty time limitations are pivotal, though belated, steps. Most importantly, 
holding senior management accountable for systemic failures is another corrective measure. 
Adverse weather has been a contributory factor in several charter and non-scheduled flight accidents, 
which includes the Bell 430 helicopter crash in Andhra Pradesh in 2009 and the Beechcraft C-90 King Air 
accident in 2001 that claimed the lives of prominent political leaders. The DGCA has specified that 
recurrent training of pilots must focus on 'weather awareness strategies and decision-making in 
uncontrolled environments'. The rollout of safety audits, with a physical workshop on safety, may help 
align all operators with the safety mandate. However, the fact is that there are some operators with poor 
safety records. There are also gaps in pilot training and experience on type, scant simulator training 
centres in India, a dearth of quality instructors and weak audits. It is acknowledged that the regulator 
itself is short-staffed in certain safety critical departments. Earlier this month, the Civil Aviation Minister 
spoke of conducting a "very thorough study" of flight operations by non-scheduled operators and to 
uncontrolled airfields. But for such a safety drive to lock into place there has to be consistent 
enforcement and committed transparency. 
A