Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 134

Mature relationship: On the India-United Kingdom economic relationship 
India and the United Kingdom have deepened business ties without fuss 
It a time when social media threats, reciprocal actions, and shrill rhetoric are becoming the 
global norm, the manner in which the India-U.K. economic relationship is unfolding is a 
refreshing change. U.K. Prime Minister Keir Starmer's two-day visit to India last week 
reinforced the existing solidity in economic relations and deepened them. India's 
negotiations with the U.S. have been fraught, erratic, and dramatic. U.S. President Donald 
Trump has also shown that he is more than willing to change the contours of deals already 
struck. Negotiations with the European Union have been less fraught and dramatic, but 
there certainly seems to be a gap between the positive assurances made by the leaders and what the 
negotiators say in private about the deal's progress. Against this backdrop, Sir Starmer chose to bring a 
delegation of more than 100 entrepreneurs, cultural representatives, and university vice-chancellors and 
left India with defence, investment and movie deals, further cementing the trade deal signed in July. The 
keenness to deepen trade relations makes eminent sense. India, despite being the fourth-largest 
economy in the world and one of the largest markets, accounts for less than 2% of the U.K.'s total 
merchandise exports. The U.K. accounts for about 3% of India's exports. There is ample scope for trade 
to grow. Growing India-U.K. trade could also mitigate some of the impact of the U.S.'s punitive 50% 
tariffs, if they remain. 
One of the unsaid reasons why India is slowing its capital expenditure is because it needs to fund its 
defence acquisitions. Sir Starmer's visit made sure that some of these acquisitions - in the form of a 
£350 million missile supply deal - came the U.K.'s way. The U.K. government also revealed that 64 
Indian companies have so far committed to invest £1.3 billion in the U.K. It goes without saying that U.K. 
companies would have made similar investment commitments in India, but the Indian government has 
inexplicably not made these public yet. Yet, statements by companies such as Rolls-Royce show that 
there is enthusiasm there. The Indian population in the U.K. is the largest ethnic minority, and this is not 
lost on the political leadership either. One of the first things Sir Starmer did on arriving in Mumbai was to 
visit Yash Raj Films (YRF) and meet Indian producers. The result was that YRF has committed to shoot 
three films in the U.K. Two U.K. universities have also committed to opening campuses in India. This 
cross-sector cooperation is how mature democracies should work together - without fuss and ego, just 
business. 
A


Evolution, revolution: On the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences 2025 
The economics Nobel is a nod to freedom and innovation 
The 2025 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences has been awarded to Philippe Aghion, Peter 
Howitt and Joel Mokyr, who have, over decades, attempted to explain humanity's 
unprecedented progress over the past two centuries. While Mokyr has provided the long 
historical and cultural context, Aghion and Howitt have given it a formal mathematical frame or 
the "creative destruction" model. The idea itself is older. It originates with economist Joseph 
Schumpeter, who described capitalism as an evolutionary system in which innovation continuously 
displaces old technologies, firms and industries - a process both creative and destructive. But 
Schumpeter's framework rested on certain assumptions: that markets are free, competition is open, and 
the state acts only as an enabler of private enterprise, not as a driver of innovation. This assumption sits 
uneasily with the historical record. The long vision of the erstwhile Soviet state, and now the Chinese 
model of developmental capitalism, reveal how the state itself can shape and direct innovation. The 
creative destruction model, refined by Aghion and Howitt in the early 1990s, emerged during the twilight 
years of the Cold War, just as the Washington Consensus and neoliberalism became the dominant 
global economic paradigm. These models reinterpreted Schumpeter's idea in mathematical form 
through the endogenous growth theory - the notion that long-term growth is generated not by external 
forces but by innovation, education, and research arising within the economy. Crucially, it assumed that 
competition and private incentives - not central planning - are the engines of technological progress. 
But the Nobel recognition comes at a time when the very conditions for this model to succeed have 
been upended by U.S. President Donald Trump. His administration has weaponised global trade, 
politicized science and technology, and turned markedly protectionist, departing from the open, rent-
seeking capitalism of the post-war American economic order. While the creative destruction and 
endogenous growth models remain powerful tools to understand progress within a specific system - 
that of neoliberal capitalism - they fail to explain the exponential technological advances of state-led 
economies such as China. These models also overlook how geopolitics, institutional fragility and 
widening inequalities can reshape the very structure of innovation. It is thus telling that the Nobel 
Committee has chosen to honour a framework whose ideal conditions - liberal markets, global 
openness, and scientific freedom - are under strain. This perhaps must be viewed as a warning that for 
liberal democracies to thrive, they must not renege on the ideals of institutional freedoms within state-
enabled capitalist societies. 
T