Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 250

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Nudge 
A. controlled 
2. Dissent 
B. urge 
3. Summoned 
C. disagreement 
4. Tamed 
D. flood 
5. Barrage 
E. called 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- C 
3- E 
4- A 
5- D 

            United and free: on the Prime Minister's Independence Day speech 
India needs unity, not uniformity; dissent must not be seen as divisive 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's Independence Day speech, his thirteenth, was delivered within 
an entirely new political context, shaped by the recent student protests that led to the 
resignation of his Education Minister. The protests may have waned, but their underlying and 
lingering reasons for the unrest remain a matter of serious concern for the country. Mr. Modi 
sought to offer hope, inspiration and purpose on the one hand while, on the other, built a new 
phantom labelled 'dimagi naxals', who, he said, influenced policymaking and required purging. The 
speech was specifically addressed to the young citizens of the nation. Mr. Modi repeatedly stressed the 
need for big dreams, firm resolve and rapid execution, arguing that India could no longer think in 
incremental terms. He promised skill training for one crore youth over the next year to prepare India for 
the artificial intelligence era; free online coaching for competitive examinations to reduce the burden on 
families and improve access to opportunities; and renewed the government's emphasis on innovation, 
quantum technology, space, robotics, data centres and other emerging sectors. Mr. Modi reiterated his 
commitment to self-reliance in defence production, including advanced technologies such as drones and 
next-generation defence systems. All Indians would naturally appreciate these promises and the 
statement of purpose. 
Whether Mr. Modi wanted, or tried, to build a unified national approach towards these challenges and 
their management is doubtful. India's progress is a continuum that should ideally have a compounding 
effect with each subsequent year. Comparing, in absolute terms, achievements before and after 2014, 
when he became Prime Minister, is neither statistically relevant nor politically prudent. The fact about 
India as it enters the 80th year as a free nation that fought off colonialism is that its challenges are 
unprecedented. It has a massive young population entering the workforce even as technology is 
disrupting life and work as never before. What India needs is an all-hands-on-the-deck approach, 
requiring a unified political will among parties and stakeholders that is unaffected by electoral contests. 
India also needs an indigenous understanding and philosophy of development rather than trying to 
mimic the techno-capitalism that is rattling advanced economies. This is a point that was underlined by 
the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh chief Mohan Bhagwat in his Independence Day speech. Mr. Modi 
clearly sees the challenges; but he also sees, unfortunately, an enemy in every critic. As he leads the 
country into a new year of independence, perhaps he could consider new ideas, including those from his 
critics, instead of amplifying divisive ones. 
P


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Lingering 
A. imitate 
2. Prudent 
B. declined 
3. Waned 
C. cleansing 
4. Mimic 
D. persistent 
5. Purging 
E. wise 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- B 
4- A 
5- C 

            Losing forest for trees: On the CAG's audit of the Green India Mission 
India is counting trees when it should be restoring forests 
 performance audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of the Green India 
Mission (GIM) has found that a scheme conceived to heal India's forests had, across a 
decade, achieved almost nothing it set out to do. Instead of improving forest quality over 1.4 
million hectares, the mission only managed 0.11 million not even a tenth of the target. On 
expanding forest cover, the mission barely scraped together four per cent. The 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) channels money 
collected from industry for diverting forest land into afforestation, while the Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, now re-branded as VB-G RAM G funds rural wage labour that 
can be used for plantation and land-restoration works, but GIM's intended convergence with these 
schemes never materialised. The mission was one of the eight pillars of the National Action Plan on 
Climate Change, unveiled in 2008, and the instrument through which India promised the Paris 
Agreement an additional carbon sink of 2.5 billion to 3 billion tonnes by 2030. Its animating idea was 
ecological - biodiversity, water, sequestration, and the revival of habitat. GIM however seems to be on 
the back burner and, for all practical purposes, replaced by a tree plantation drive called 'Ek Ped Maa 
Ke Naam (A Tree in the Name of Mother)'. Launched in 2024, the government reports planting 140 crore 
saplings so far, but the latest forest data expose the gulf between a tree and a forest. The India State of 
Forest Report 2023 records a gain of 1,445 square kilo-metres in green cover but only 156 sq km of it is 
true forest. The rest, 1,289 sq km, is 'tree cover outside recorded forests.' Within the recorded forests, 
dense canopy is thinning into scrub. Ergo, India is planting more and foresting less. 
Few examples encapsulate this as much as the controversy over the Aravallis. Arguably the country's 
most degraded range its hillocks quarried away, its native growth overrun by the invasive 'vilayati kikar' 
(Prosopis juliflora) - it is now to be rescued by a 'Green Wall' of fresh planting. But these arboreal 
conscripts cannot undo the damage from years of mining, halt encroachment, or summon back an 
ecosystem that took millennia to form. Restoration is not land-scaping. The CAG's instrument is 
accountancy: it can count hectares and rupees, not the worth of a living forest; and its assessment 
cannot always capture the practical challenges of implementing missions. However, its verdict still 
lands. A mission to restore India's forests has been allowed to wither while the state busies itself 
counting trees. 
A