Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 209

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Austerity 
A. encourage 
2. Curtail 
B. delayed 
3. Belated 
C. reduce 
4. Urge 
D. useless 
5. Futile 
E. thrift 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- B 
4- A 
5- D 

            Data and justice: On courts in India and AI tools 
As courts adopt AI, care must be taken on the potential for abuse 
In the latest step in a long-standing effort to digitise the judiciary, Chief Justice of India (CJI) Surya 
Kant announced two initiatives from the Bench, called 'One Case, One Data' (OCOD), a unified 
judicial data platform, and 'Su-Sahayak', an AI-powered chatbot on the Supreme Court of India 
website. OCOD promises a unified digital trail for a dispute as it moves through various courts, 
linkages between court records and litigant actions (such as appeals), easier access to various 
documents, lower need for manual verification, reciprocal access to High Courts and other courts, and 
more accurate judicial statistics. It is notable considering the wide variation in software practices and 
records quality across India's thousands of district and subordinate courts. If the programme succeeds, 
standardised data could also allow administrators to determine where cases are held up and ease 
procedural bottlenecks, and improve data-based decision-making overall. 'Su-Sahayak' has been 
integrated into the Court website's front-end to help users navigate case status, cause lists, orders and 
judgments, e-services, and frequently asked questions. As with any major state-backed technology 
rollout in India, questions about interoperability, integrity of legacy records, restricting access to 
private information, and staff skilling remain. By aspiring to a centralised digital fingerprint for each case, 
OCOD also bears the risk of misuse. 
While the CJI said that these new tools will improve "access to justice", their introduction risks 
deepening the digital divide. OCOD may require lawyers to maintain digital scanners, cloud backup 
options, and updated software. Metropolitan corporate firms can easily absorb these costs but 
independent practitioners in the district and taluka levels will lack the capital. The system may also 
introduce digital middlemen to help litigants who cannot navigate the e-filing portal, potentially creating a 
new layer of unregulated costs. While the government has launched assistants with voice-first 
capabilities, such as Jan Sahayak, 'Su-Sahayak' is primarily text-based and could exclude people who 
are not comfortable typing or navigating complex website menus. The state and the judiciary must 
ensure that the AI model is not biased against marginalised communities who were historically 
disproportionately arrested or denied bail. India's courts have generally been more comfortable with AI 
for assistance than for substantive reasoning. 'Su-Sahayak' follows SUVAS, to translate judgments, and 
SUPACE, which processes facts and legal precedents. The line must continue to hold as the judiciary 
adopts more powerful tools that have already tempted practitioners in other domains to abuse them. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Bottlenecks 
A. intensifying 
2. Deepening 
B. path 
3. Trail 
C. integration 
4. Interoperability 
D. partial 
5. Biased 
E. obstructions 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- A 
3- B 
4- C 
5- D 

            Testing troubles: On the National Testing Agency, NEET-UG 2026 
Leaks and breaches have destroyed the National Testing Agency's credibility 
nce bitten, twice shy: this saying surely does not apply to the National Testing Agency 
(NTA). Given the number of times that the Agency has run into trouble in the conduct of 
common entrance exams, it would have been logical to expect those at the helm to have 
learnt their lessons. However, this week's cancellation of the National Eligibility-cum-
Entrance Test (NEET)-UG affecting over 22 lakh students is a serious blow to the 
agency's reputation. The NTA, on May 12, 2026, announced the cancellation of the exam held on May 
3, amid allegations of paper leak, as the government tasked the CBI with carrying out a 
comprehensive inquiry. The decision followed investigations revealing that a 'guess paper' - a 
collection of predicted, high-importance questions created to help students prepare - matched 
numerous questions in chemistry and biology. Media reports said that this material had reached 
coaching hubs in Rajasthan nearly a month ahead, and had been sold to aspirants for huge sums. This 
led to investigations by the Rajasthan Police Special Operations Group and 15 people were arrested. In 
the face of such obvious fraud, the NTA maintained the line that the decision to cancel the exam was 
taken "in the interest of students and in recognition of the trust on which the national examination system 
rests". The question though, is: does the NTA still enjoy that trust? NEET has been dogged by 
controversy right from the start, with several States opposing the format. But even after it was rolled out 
across the country, the NTA, as the agency conducting the exam, has suffered several dents to its 
credibility, with various charges and controversies coming up with depressing regularity. This includes 
the 2019 impersonation scam in Tamil Nadu where students used proxies to write the exam; the 2022 
controversy of frisking girl examinees in Kerala, and the 2024 paper leak and grace marks controversy. 
The K. Radhakrishnan committee, which was constituted to recommend reforms in the examination 
process, recommended a restructuring of the NTA, and creating strong institutional linkages with State 
and district authorities in order to produce a secure test administration apparatus. Among others, it also 
made recommendations for multi-stage testing, hybrid use of papers and computers, and a series of 
measures to prevent breaches and malpractices. It would be a crime to allow the NTA to continue with 
its inept conduct of common entrance exams, impacting the future of several lakhs of students. NEET 
was introduced as a measure to bring into play a single, standardised, and transparent entrance exam 
for medical admissions. But the transparency that it has so far shown is of an entirely different kind: 
leaks and breaches of confidentiality. 
O