Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 208

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Bogus 
A. story 
2. Incoherent 
B. scattered 
3. Anecdote 
C. fake 
4. Fragmented 
D. area 
5. Domain 
E. inconsistent 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Cost to access: On health check-up for workers 
The opportunity cost of accessing medical care remains high 
The Union Labour Ministry has announced that it will provide a free annual health check-up to 
workers aged 40 years or more, following an existing provision in the new Labour Codes. 
The programme will be implemented through the Employees' State Insurance Corporation 
(ESIC). For workers in hazardous conditions, such as handling toxic chemicals or operating 
heavy machinery, check-ups are mandatory; if illness is detected, ESIC hospitals and 
dispensaries will provide free treatment. India already has a few workers' health obligations on paper, 
including under the Factories Act 1948 (only within factories), the ESI Act 1948, and the Occupational 
Safety, Health and Working Conditions (OSH) Code 2020. The new programme will be financed through 
the well-endowed ESI fund, although the government is still shoring up the number of beds and doctors 
available via PMJAY-empanelled facilities. At this time, operational evidence suggests that insured 
workers will be the main beneficiaries. 
Commendable though the initiative is, its success is not guaranteed. At present, only around 31 crore of 
94 crore workers are on the e-Shram portal, whose integration with ESIC is still in its early stages in 
many States. Labour Minister Mansukh Mandaviya also failed to address how a woman working in a 
garment home unit or as a domestic worker could access the longer maternity leave if she has no 
'employer'. Annual check-ups for women also warrant specific medical staff needs whereas many 
ESIC camps are crowded and dominated by men. As with many of its predecessors, the programme 
does not address the opportunity costs of accessing health care, forcing workers to continue 
contending with lost wages. An ESIC facility may also refer a worker to another centre if it lacks the 
resources for specific tests, leading to repeat visits and added time and cost. The new programme 
focuses predominantly on non-communicable diseases such as diabetes and hypertension. Heat-
related illnesses are not explicitly recognised as occupational diseases under the ESI Act whereas 
construction and agriculture workers are most at risk of them. Waste-pickers and sanitation workers on 
the other hand face greater risk of infectious diseases such as hepatitis and leptospirosis. The scheme 
offers screening but does not mandate proactive vaccination. The government must meet workers 
where they are, through mobile occupational health units and - as the OSH Code 2020 stipulates for 
organised workers - at their places of work, and provide tokens to compensate them for time spent on 
check-ups. Otherwise, any scheme of this nature will not improve upon the already deficient system. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Contending 
A. inadequate 
2. Stipulate 
B. dangerous 
3. Hazardous 
C. dealing with 
4. Deficient 
D. justify 
5. Warrant 
E. require 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- B 
4- A 
5- D 

            Belated warning: On the Prime Minister's austerity appeal 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi's suggestions to Indians imply a serious economic 
impact 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's seven-point call to action for the citizens of India lays bare the 
severity of the impact of the West Asia crisis. Further, apart from its implications, Mr. Modi's 
message is problematic for two other key reasons: its timing and content. A key part of his 
message was to urge people to work from home and reduce their fuel usage. A more 
effective approach might have been to lead by example. Yet, Mr. Modi's message comes 
days after he and his Cabinet colleagues flew all over the country and organised roadshows to campaign 
for the recent elections. Neither did any of his pre-election speeches mention these issues. His message 
also comes on the back of daily reassurances by his government's officials that there was nothing to 
worry. Clearly, there is. The Prime Minister's message also follows various Ministers' attempts to heap 
praise on him for not raising petrol and diesel prices. A decision not to further burden the common man 
is welcome, but the flip side is that it fails to impress upon them the need to curtail consumption. The 
government took that strategic call before the elections, and is now trying to dilute it. Perhaps a hike in 
fuel prices will follow soon. The Prime Minister's speech also coincided with a similar call to action for 
Indian corporates by the Confederation of Indian Industry. This kind of coordinated messaging points to a 
dire situation. Several of the Prime Minister's suggestions might also have other negative impacts that 
could be more serious than the problems they are trying to address. Some others might simply not be as 
effective as he hopes. 
If farmers stop using chemical fertilizers, as he has urged, the immediate impact will be on crop output at 
a time when El Niño is already set to hurt it. High-frequency indicators are already revealing the 
economic damage of the West Asia crisis. This will only exacerbate the situation. The suggestion to 
stop foreign travel will conserve foreign exchange, but Reserve Bank of India (RBI) data up to February 
2026 shows that Indians' foreign travel spending in 2025-26 was already down by 3%. March, the first 
month after the Iran war broke out, is likely to have seen an even sharper decline. The real pressure 
on the rupee and India's foreign exchange is because foreign institutional investors are pulling out while 
the RBI is using valuable dollars to shore up the falling currency. Urging Indians to buy local is another 
way of asking them to consume less, since purely domestic supply is not nearly enough to cater to the 
demand. Asking them to buy less gold is also likely to be futile. All this means that the economy is in for 
a hard time over the next few months - a warning the Prime Minister should have delivered much 
earlier, elections or no elections. 
P