Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 170

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
COLUMN A 
COLUMN B 
1. CHURN 
A. STRAINED 
2. FRAYED 
B. RESTRICTED 
3. UNENVIABLE 
C. DISRUPTION 
4. GHASTLY 
D. UNDESIRABLE 
5. HANDCUFFED 
E. HORRIBLE 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- D 
4- E 
5- B 
Fearing de-dollarisation: On the U.S., oil and the petrodollar 
U.S.'s moves on oil reflect its uneasiness over global trade and finance 
resident Donald Trump's urgencyto push the Russia Sanctions Bill through Congress, 
granting him the power to impose tariffs of up to 500% on nations buying oil from Moscow, 
isofficially framed as a punitive measure to weaken Russia's war economy. Yet, this 
legislative push comes just after the capture of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro on 
January 3. Throughout his press briefings thereafter, Mr. Trump emphasised Venezuela's 
vast oil reserves as America's underlying strategic interest. This twin focuson Russian 
sanctions and Venezuelan oil assets suggeststhat both measures are less about geopolitical 
'penalisation' and more about protecting the petrodollar's dominance at a time when its hegemony is 
eroding. For decades, oil has been priced and largely settled in U.S. dollars. That system underpinned 
the dollar's centrality in global finance for much of the late 20th century. But since the sanctions on 
Russia following its 2014 annexation of Crimea, and, more vigorously, after the Ukraine invasion in 
2022, major consumers such as China and India have deepened trading arrangements that circumvent 
the dollar. India, for instance, imported substantial volumes of Russian crude since 2022, accounting for 
P 

            more than 20% of Russia's war-period crude exports. China's purchases were even larger, reflecting its 
strategy to secure energy at a discount and experiment with non-dollar settlement mechanisms. 
China's useof the yuan in energy trade hassignificantly enhanced the internationalisation of the 
renminbi. India has also reportedly begun paying for some Russian crude in yuan, signalling small but 
telling shifts in how global energy commerce is conducted. Meanwhile, the oil market is evolving with the 
global energy transition - electric vehicles sales, led by China, are reshaping demand patterns. Mr. 
Trump's "return to oil" rhetoric and policy thrust must thus be read in the context of this transition. 
China'sdominancein the EV ecosystem representsa structural challenge not just to oil firms but also to 
the broader economic and financial architectures that supported U.S. dominance for decades. In this 
light, it is not far-fetched to argue that America's aggressivemovesin Venezuela and its hardline 
strategyagainst Moscow on oil (and not much else) areaimed more at curtailing China's expanding 
influence - both in energy markets and in pushing alternatives to the petrodollar - than at addressing 
geopolitical grievances. Moreover, the spectreof a parallel currency arrangementcontemplated by 
BRICS as a challenge to the 'mighty dollar' further unsettlestraditional dollar-centric financial orders. 
What is at stake is not merely oil or geopolitics, but the architecture of global trade and finance at a 
moment of historic transition.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Eroding 
A. enormous 
2. Aggressive 
B. supremacy 
3. Vast 
C. bold 
4. Contemplated 
D. diminishing 
5. Hegemony 
E. pondered 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Inward turn: On the U.S.'s impending plunge into isolationism 
U.S. isolationism will fuel ethno-nationalism and racist hatred 
The Donald Trump administration has sparked fresh concern on the global stage after it 
announced through a presidential memorandum that the U.S. would be withdrawing from the 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, as well as 65 other international organisations 
and platforms, describing these as "contrary to the interests of the United States". Having 
already pulled out of the Paris climate agreement in his first term, Mr. Trump has now 
doubled down on plans to end all U.S. commitments to fight climate change by reversing his 
predecessor Joe Biden's actions. Washington has made plans for a quick exit mostly from UN-related 
agencies and advisory panels whose mandate relates to climate and renewable energy, gender equality, 
minority rights, rule of law and other areas that the Trump administration considers to be supporting 
diversity and 'woke' initiatives. 
There is a serious question of real-world impact and damage to the existing order that is engendered by 
the U.S.'s impending plunge into pure isolationism. The administration's wholesale rejection, in early 
2025, of decades of prior institutional commitments to and engagement with the World Health 
Organization has already led to setbacks to projects across the developing world that focus on maternal 
and infant mortality, disease surveillance, and halting the advance of tuberculosis, malaria and 
HIV/AIDS - all heavily dependent on external funding. In the climate change, human rights, labour 
standards and rule of law contexts, the key financing channels and impactful leadership momentum have 
historically been associated with U.S. institutions. The inevitable vacuum that the Trump White House's 
action will produce could actually cede that space to power players such as China and Russia, whose 
incentives to support a level playing field in coordinated international policies with a strong global 
footprint may not be aligned with the rest of the democratic world. The world has already been witness, 
under both Trump administrations, to the deleterious, destabilising consequences of Washington 
weaponising trade tariffs as means to achieving political goals. Now this small-frame view of national 
self-interest trumping good governance principles for the global commons may become the modus 
operandi for the remainder of the 21st century. The very idea of the nation state may face 
unprecedented challenges as inward orientation in policymaking will build an ever stronger base for 
rising ethno-nationalism and racist hatred of the "other". History has shown that this gives free rein to 
the worst qualities of human nature, with disastrous socio-political consequences. 
T