Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 202

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Heinous 
A. weak 
2. Vulnerable 
B. encouraged 
3. Aegis 
C. choked 
4. Strangled 
D. shield 
5. Emboldened 
E. atrocious 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- A 
3- D 
4- C 
5- B 

            Tepid promises: On India and non-fossil capacity 
India must enhance battery storage to fully use non-fossil capacity 
India came in late, but it was worth the wait. A section of the Paris Agreement, under which all 
countries except the United States have agreed to keep temperatures from rising beyond 2°C of 
pre-Industrial times, requires updating their targets every five years from 2020. As of December 
last year, India and Argentina were the only two G-20 countries that had not announced updated 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) for 2035. This was despite India's Environment Minister 
committing at COP30 in Brazil, in November 2025, to update by the 'year-end'. The saving grace is that 
this happened in time before Financial Year 2025-26 ends in a week. The latest set of NDCs by India 
commits to, by 2035, an installed electric capacity that is 60% from non-fossil sources; reducing, by 47%, 
the intensity of emissions per unit of GDP and having a 3.5 billion tonne-4 billion tonne CO2 carbon sink. 
This is an update over India's 2020 NDCs: of an installed electric capacity that is 50% from non-fossil 
sources; reducing, by 45%, the intensity of emissions per unit of GDP and having a 2.5 billion tonne-3 
billion tonne CO2 carbon sink. Thus, the necessary boxes have been ticked. 
The EU has committed to a 40%-49% cut below 2005 levels. As a developing nation, India - a 
significant contributor of net emissions in recent years but below the world average in per capita 
emissions - will not cut annual emissions but promises to emit less carbon per unit of energy and 
source more of its power from non-fossil sources. It has also committed to being net zero by 2070 
through increasing its tree and forest cover (which absorb CO2) and the recently announced technology 
pathways such as carbon capture, utilisation, and storage. [A] India's 2035 goals are easily achievable 
and the government has expressed that plainly. India already met its 2030 non-fossil target last year, 
with 52% capacity installed. The rub is that only about 25% of the power generated is non-fossil due to 
insufficient battery storage which is unable to harness all the available solar and wind power. The Power 
Ministry's National Generation Adequacy Plan itself expects 70% of the projected installed 1,121 GW 
capacity by 2035-36 to be non-fossil. It is tempting to laud India for embellishing its green 
commitments amidst a war in West Asia that has squeezed supply of a vital fossil fuel. However, without 
actual improvements in generated supply, these numbers mean little. With the war demonstrating the 
chokehold that a fossil fuel has, India must exhibit more urgency toward enhancing battery storage and 
improving its electric grid to better utilise existing non-fossil capacity. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Exhibit 
A. elegance 
2. Enhance 
B. utilize 
3. Tepid 
C. display 
4. Grace 
D. lukewarm 
5. Harness 
E. improve 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- D 
4- A 
5- B 

            A game for all ages: On the 2026 Indian Premier League 19th season 
The IPL is benefiting from both youth and experience 
ess than three weeks after India won the ICC T20 World Cup at Ahmedabad, another T20 
caravan rolls into view. The Indian Premier League (IPL) commencing at Bengaluru's M. 
Chinnaswamy Stadium on Saturday, will traverse the country and conclude on May 31. 
Featuring 10 teams and 74 matches, the IPL has grown in stature and gained commercial heft 
since its inaugural edition in 2008. That just a few days ago defending champion Royal 
Challengers Bengaluru (RCB) and Rajasthan Royals found fresh owners spending 
astronomical rates is a reflection of the league's high return on investment. Originally started 
as a counter to the rebel Indian Cricket League, the IPL remains the best among cricketing leagues 
across the globe. There is sadness too as the last edition, which crowned RCB, witnessed a terrible 
stampede outside the Chinnaswamy Stadium leaving 11 fans dead. When the IPL happened in 2011, 
shortly after India had won the 50-over World Cup, Virat Kohli had confessed that he, and many others 
from the champion side, took time to adjust to the league. Cut to the present, Suryakumar Yadav's 
men, spread across various IPL teams, will have the same predicament. Perhaps within a week, they 
should find their rhythm, especially Sanju Samson, who moved from Rajasthan Royals to the Chennai 
Super Kings (CSK). 
Kohli, M.S. Dhoni and Rohit Sharma, constitute a troika that has been intrinsic to the IPL since 2008. At 
44, Dhoni still remains relevant to CSK's plans. The three stars may no longer lead their respective units 
as the next generation has staked claim, but all three are vital to their franchises. The age-spectrum in 
the IPL ranges from veteran Dhoni to 15-year-old Vaibhav Sooryavanshi. The youngster, turning out 
for Rajasthan Royals, slammed a ton in the last edition. This second season would be vital for him as he 
races towards an Indian cap. Be it RCB or Mumbai Indians, which last claimed the trophy in 2020, or 
even an outfit such as Delhi Capitals that has never won the silverware, the IPL presents an opportunity 
to further their legacies. Among overseas stars, England's Jacob Bethell, who nearly ruined India's 
championship dreams in the recent T20 World Cup, would be an added attraction. Turning out for RCB, 
The would be Kohli's ally. While most injured Australian seamers are recovering, it is expected that Pat 
Cummins will gradually turn up for Sunrisers Hyderabad. Even Prithvi Shaw, on a comeback trail, 
would lean on this IPL to catch the selectors' attention again. The league's 19th edition is a reflection of 
its strong roots while ushering in fresh talent. 
L