Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 166

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Sluggish 
A. decrease 
2. Surge 
B. align 
3. Ebb 
C. increase 
4. Coincide 
D. lazy 
5. Predict 
E. forecast 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- A 
4- B 
5- E 

            Descent into farce: On the Election Commission of India, the SIR 
Ad hoc changes and poor implementation mar the Election Commission of India's 
Special Intensive Revision of electoral rolls 
The Election Commission of India (ECI)'s Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls 
across 12 States and Union Territories (UT) is fast descending into a farce. Take the case of 
West Bengal, where furore over elderly residents having to attend eligibility hearings in 
remote locations even after submitting their enrolment forms forced the ECI to order home 
verification. Or, the fact that it had to conditionally halt hearings of "unmapped" voters (those 
whose names or parents' names were not mapped with the 2002 SIR). Summons were in the form of 
software notices, but this software was not used in Bihar. An association of civil servants complained that 
this "suo motu system-driven deletion of electors from the draft electoral rolls in West Bengal in the 
ongoing SIR process [bypassed] the statutory role of the [Electoral Registration Officers]". The 
procedural chaos could have been avoided had the ECI not rushed into the SIR just before Assembly 
elections in States/UTs such as West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Puducherry. Its ad hoc use of 
software - the ECI junked its de-duplication software in Bihar and told the Supreme Court why it was 
not using it, but reportedly used it alongside another software to flag "unmapped" voters without proper 
protocol - is creating confusion and distress. The suspicion that the ECI is using an exercise of 
updating electoral rolls as a de facto citizenship screening exercise seems to be confirmed by the 
manner in which it is going about things. 
There are inconsistencies and anomalies in the draft electoral rolls, many of which have been flagged by 
The Hindu's data-driven investigations. The over 6.5 crore deletions, according to provisional numbers, 
suggest methodological problems in and poor implementation of the exercise. In Uttar Pradesh, 
provisional figures show that 2.89 crore names have been deleted, which could possibly explain why the 
ECI has postponed publication of the draft roll to January 6. In Tamil Nadu and Gujarat, which are 
relatively urbanised States with net in-migration of electors, 97 lakh and 73.7 lakh electors, respectively, 
have been taken off the draft rolls. That both States have since seen the furious inclusion of lakhs of 
names - added incomprehensibly as fresh additions in another procedural flaw - suggests that the 
enumeration phase was concluded haphazardly. This situation could have been avoided had the Court 
gone beyond limited interventions - which were salves for Bihar electors - to properly vet the new SIR 
procedure for constitutionality. It is still not too late for the Court to take note of the infirmities and to 
decide firmly in favour of the electorate. The fate of the very idea of universal adult franchise hangs in 
the balance. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Suspicion 
A. disorder 
2. De facto 
B. extremely angry 
3. Furious 
C. comedy 
4. Farce 
D. doubt 
5. Chaos 
E. real 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- B 
4- C 
5- A 

            The water divide: On water contamination, piped water supply in India 
The quality of piped water supply must be checked at delivery point 
In indicator of public health is the well-being of the poorer sections of the people. Health, 
education, infrastructure, clean air and clean water all fall under basic needs, and various 
institutions should be busy working round the clock to improve lives. On most of these 
counts, however, India appears to be falling short, with the latest being the tragedy 
unfolding in Indore, Madhya Pradesh. At least four people, including a baby (official toll; 
unofficial is 14), have lost their lives after drinking municipality-supplied water, with more 
than 2,000 people falling ill. Over 200 people are in hospital and 32 are in the ICU. It is a 
development steeped in irony because Indore has been voted India's cleanest city for several years in a 
row for its exemplary waste segregation and management practice among other cleanliness measures it 
undertook. As has become the unfortunate norm after every mishap, the blame game began swiftly with 
authorities pinning it on tardy progress on installing a fresh supply line. A committee is to investigate the 
issue, but things should not have been allowed to precipitate such a deathly crisis in the first place. This 
is the second instance of a water issue in the State in the past two months. In November, students at 
the Vellore Institute of Technology campus near Bhopal vehemently protested against contaminated 
water supply after many of them began contracting jaundice. 
It is a shame that despite progress under the Swachh Bharat Mission and Jal Jeevan Mission, water 
woes continue. The National Family Health Survey data show that despite a rural-urban divide, 96% of 
households use an improved source of drinking water. A municipal supply is always considered to be a 
safe and "improved source", and if checks and balances were in place, the authorities at Indore would 
have spotted the contamination and let people know of the dangers. Giving access to water is 
meaningless unless the quality of the supply is assured. There needs to be better enforcement of water 
guidelines and other environmental laws at all levels. Air pollution is already wreaking havoc on citizens' 
health; unsafe drinking water should not be added to the list. The incidents in Madhya Pradesh should be 
taken as a wake-up call for India's water management. With a population that is close to 147 crore, 
India's water-borne disease burden is also high. All States should immediately check water supply 
sources for chemical and sewage contaminants. Old infrastructure including pipes must be repaired or 
replaced. There should be strict enforcement of policy and monitoring of practice along with awareness 
campaigns. Indore and many more cities in India have to clean up their act, or risk more deaths. 
A