Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 205

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Strengthen 
A. impose 
2. Inflict 
B. supportive 
3. Ancillary 
C. disastrous 
4. Expanded 
D. enlarged 
5. Catastrophic 
E. bolster 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- A 
3- B 
4- D 
5- C 

            Tackling takedowns: On the government and online censorship 
Online censorship is a threat to the fundamental right to free expression 
The Union government's enthusiastic misuse of its spurious powers to censor lawful speech 
online is an alarming and exponentially growing threat to India's democracy. With 
amendments to the IT Rules, 2021 - which are themselves on shaky constitutional ground - 
the government has successfully pressured Meta and X to take down content within three-
hour timelines that leave little time to push back, lest they lose "safe harbour" protections and 
be dragged into court or, worse, have their employees face personal criminal liability. Under the cover 
of fighting AI-generated content, all speech is being subjected to a despotic regime where the state can 
silence speech at will, destroying the promise of the Internet, which has emerged as an important 
alternative voice to express everyday concerns. Visceral, hard-hitting expressions of independent 
voices are an integral part of a society led by free ideals and representative democracy. Weaponising 
Sections 69A and 79(3)(b) of the IT Act, 2000 to take down such content, and accounts wholesale, 
distorts the public conversation in a way that benefits the ruling party, with scant regard for the 
freedoms of audiences and the livelihoods of creators. Often, entire accounts of the Opposition are 
deleted. Since this infrastructure of censorship has been built brick by brick without any moral 
compunctions on the path down which they lead, takedowns of independent media outlets and critical 
commentators have grown. Some have been reversed, at the cost of revealing their identity. The 
government continues to enjoy these powers under a veil of secrecy, publishing no meaningful data on 
how its hold on online discourse has tightened. 
By opening up the so-called Sahyog portal to police officials around the country, requests under Section 
79(3)(b) have been supercharged as a censorial rubber stamp that the IT Act simply does not give 
them. The clear Supreme Court precedent outlining what "actual knowledge" of illegality online 
constitutes for takedown orders has been reduced to a mockery. The Karnataka High Court has even 
brushed aside binding Court precedent under Shreya Singhal vs Union of India, even as the 
government has not dared to formalise the powers that it is exercising by passing a law in Parliament. 
Social media platforms have failed miserably in acting as a check in this ongoing rampage for power 
over online speech and have instead chosen the peace of mind that comes with automatically 
processing takedown notices. X continues to resist the Sahyog portal, but faces pressure from 
proceedings in the Karnataka and Delhi High Courts. The political elite must ponder the consequences 
of its campaign against online speech. Opposition-ruled States have quickly leapt to leverage the 
T

            Sahyog portal's powers. A future government run by today's Opposition will likely play by the same 
sordid rules.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Visceral 
A. mask 
2. Sordid 
B. fake 
3. Veil 
C. weak 
4. Spurious 
D. intense 
5. Shaky 
E. shameful 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Lost and found: On the 2026 Assembly elections 
The National Democractic Alliance's success in Bengal and Assam is partly offset 
by its failure in Tamil Nadu and Kerala 
The results of the 2026 Assembly elections in Assam, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and 
Puducherry highlight several factors that have a bearing on India's direction as a secular, 
democratic, federal republic. In Assam and Puducherry, the BJP and its partners retained 
power, while in the other three States, incumbents were swept away in a strong current of 
changed popular opinion. [A1] In Assam, for the first time, the BJP [A]/ partners, won 101 
seats [B]/ in the 126-member Assembly [C]/ crossed the halfway mark of 64 seats [D]/ on its own and, 
with its [E]. For the Congress, this is its worst performance - even lower than its 1985 tally in the 
aftermath of the Assam Agitation. The regional outfits that were part of the Congress-led alliance, 
including the Raijor Dal and Assam Jatiya Parishad, were routed, while those within the National 
Democratic Alliance (NDA) - chiefly the Asom Gana Parishad and the Bodoland People's Front - 
managed to win a few seats, though they now have little clout given the BJP's outright majority. Chief 
Minister Himanta Biswa Sarma has reinforced his position in the State through a mix of polarising 
communal rhetoric and redistribution schemes. Congress leader Gaurav Gogoi lost his own seat. 
In West Bengal, the BJP has achieved a decisive victory through long-term planning, aided by the 
State's political history, a tainted election process, and the exhaustion of the Trinamool Congress 
(TMC)'s politics that had run its course. [A2] Spread elsewhere, and has [A]/ national movement and to 
Hindutva [B]/ carried a strong sense of regional identity [C]/ Bengal has been home to India's [D]/ ideas 
long before they [E]. The BJP, through years of meticulous organisation, converted a threshold 
population of the State to its totalising nationalist narrative. Having subsumed the regional politics of 
Maharashtra, Assam and Odisha, it had set its sights on West Bengal with obsessive determination, 
and has won. The TMC faces existential danger, with its founder-leader Mamata Banerjee at 71 and its 
cadre and voters now susceptible to pressure from the BJP. This election was also the most tainted in 
India's elections: around 27 lakh people were arbitrarily removed from the electoral rolls, and the 
Supreme Court of India took an unhelpful view of that grave assault on the fundamentals of democracy. 
If that is the sign of things to come, it is cause for serious concern. 
In Tamil Nadu, the political start-up, the TVK, led by actor C. Joseph Vijay has made a stunning debut. 
Mr. Vijay is set to become the first Chief Minister not from either of the two principal Dravidian parties 
since the DMK first captured power in the State a historic rupture in Tamil politics. While his popularity is 
now established, his acumen in navigating the complexities of governance and managing the 
T

            relationship with the BJP and the Centre will be tested from day one. Though the differences in vote 
share among the formations the DMK-led alliance, the AIADMK-led alliance, and TVK contesting alone 
were not large, a three-cornered contest and the first past the post mechanism delivered an outsized 
advantage to the TVK. The DMK's votes were more evenly spread across the State, while the TVK and 
AIADMK had theirs concentrated in pockets of influence, yielding far better vote-to-seat conversion. Mr. 
Vijay had the advantage of novelty, and the electorate proved open to a new experiment. 
In Kerala, the Congress-led UDF's overwhelming victory is as notable as the pitiable performance of the 
CPI(M)-led LDF. The LDF's defeat belongs principally to outgoing Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan, who 
uncharacteristically for the State and more so for the Left - had built a personality cult. The BJP has won 
a historic high of three seats, but the UDF's return, while restoring Kerala's traditional alternation in 
power, could act as a speedbreaker to the BJP's ambitions. The Congress faces the immediate task of 
amicably settling the question of Chief Minister from among three potential candidates - K.C. 
Venugopal, V.D. Satheesan and Ramesh Chennithala. The election results strengthen Home Minister 
Amit Shah's hand within the BJP's internal dynamics, as the party has grown into a behemoth 
harbouring multiple interest groups and ambitious leaders. Mr. Shah was the key strategist in West 
Bengal, and Mr. Sarma in Assam is firmly aligned with him. A reconstitution of all party organisations and 
a possible reshuffle of the Union Council of Ministers will likely reflect his preeminence in the days 
ahead. The BJP, by its capacity and willingness to expand its footprint across regions and social groups 
- oftentimes bending norms - is placing immense pressure on India's federal democracy. The DMK and 
the TMC have been bulwarks of Opposition politics within and outside Parliament, as demonstrated in 
the recent parliamentary vote on the Delimitation Bill. With both beaten at the hustings, and buoyed by 
its victories in Assam and West Bengal, the BJP will feel tempted and emboldened to continue its 
course of unilateralism. It would be in the interest of the country and of democracy for the BJP to be 
accommodative and sensitive towards diverse aspirations; while platforms of regional political 
mobilisation such as the TMC and the DMK will have to adapt to new challenges. The regional parties in 
Assam and Kerala too faced a setback, suggesting popular fatigue and an inclination towards larger 
frames of reference mediated by social media. As for the Congress, these results represent victory in 
Kerala, defeat in Assam, and a lost opportunity in Tamil Nadu. The defeat of the DMK and TMC sets the 
stage for a potential realignment of the Opposition, opening the possibility for the Congress to aggregate 
and galvanise social and other interest groups and to position itself as a weightier axis of anti-BJP 
politics.