Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 193

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Chaos 
A. conflict 
2. Condemn 
B. incite 
3. Provoke 
C. criticize 
4. Massive 
D. disorder 
5. Strife 
E. huge 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- B  
4- E 
5- A 

            New formula: On Formula One and net carbon zero plan 
F1 can meet climate targets without losing any of the thrill 
ormula One (F1) is currently going through a golden period. It is a fact reflected through record 
race attendances, viewing figures, teams' healthy balance sheets, and soaring valuations. 
Even on track, the previous seasons have seen exciting battles. In 2025, the battle for the 
drivers' title went down to the last race with three drivers in contention. Eventually, 
McLaren's Lando Norris triumphed ahead of his teammate Oscar Piastri and Red Bull's Max 
Verstappen, the four-time champion. Now, on the eve of the season-opening Australian Grand Prix in 
Melbourne, F1 is embarking on a bold trajectory that could define its future. At a time when there is 
heightened focus on climate goals and a push towards sustainable living, F1, with its fuel-guzzling 
machines and a global circus criss-crossing five continents 24 times a year, can be seen as an 
anachronistic endeavour. In 2019, F1 laid out a plan to become net carbon zero by 2030, and starting 
this year, it will take its biggest leap towards achieving that goal. The governing body, the Fédération 
Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), has introduced a new hybrid engine formula for 2026, split equally 
between conventional internal combustion engines and electric motors. More importantly, all cars will 
be powered by advanced sustainable fuels. 
These fuels are derived from carbon capture, municipal waste, and non-food biomass rather than from 
crude oil. The battery for the electric motor will be charged by harvesting energy lost during braking. 
Historically, major automotive manufacturers have used motorsport as a platform for research and 
development and have transferred technology from track vehicles to traditional cars. The new rules have 
attracted big firms back to the series. Audi has entered its own team; Honda and Ford have returned to 
the sport as engine partners to Aston Martin and Red Bull Racing, respectively. While these are lofty 
ambitions, in the end, F1 is still a sport, and the main aim is to produce an exciting championship. The 
charm of racing is seeing drivers push cars to their absolute limits and enthral viewers. During pre-
season testing, the new cars received a lukewarm response from the drivers, who felt the new formula 
did not allow them to push the cars to their limits at all times, as they were energy-starved. Though 
these are early days yet, it will be interesting to see how quickly the teams overcome these challenges or 
how the rule-makers step in to ensure that the spirit of the sport is not lost. If F1 can deliver close 
racing and a competitive championship by this season's end, the gamble may prove worthwhile. 
F


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Spying 
A. revenge 
2. Retaliation 
B. secret 
3. Worrisome 
C. espionage 
4. Obliterated 
D. concerning 
5. Clandestine 
E. demolished 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- D 
4- E 
5- B 

            West Asia on fire: On the Israeli-American war against Iran 
India should oppose the U.S.'s attempt to widen the war to the Indian Ocean 
ix days after the unprovoked, illegal Israeli-American war against Iran began, West Asia has 
descended into chaos. When U.S. President Donald Trump launched the war, killing Iran's 
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, other leaders and at least 160 schoolchildren, he 
called on Iranians to overthrow the Islamic Republic and take over state institutions. That did 
not happen. Iran retaliated by targeting Israel as well as American bases, assets and missions 
in the Persian Gulf region. Satellite image-based analyses suggest that Iran has struck communication 
and radar structures at seven U.S. military sites. Hezbollah, the Lebanese militant group, also joined 
the war with rocket attacks on northern Israel. In Iraq, pro-Iran militias have struck American assets in 
Erbil and other areas. The U.S. has confirmed that at least six service personnel were killed and three 
fighter jets were lost in Kuwaiti "friendly fire", according to the Pentagon. On March 4, the U.S. expanded 
the theatre of war to the Indian Ocean by torpedoing an Iranian warship, IRIS Dena, off Sri Lanka, killing 
at least 83 personnel. The ship was in the region for last week's International Fleet Review off 
Visakhapatnam. If Mr. Trump and his ally Benjamin Netanyahu believed that Khamenei's killing would 
lead to a collapse of Iran's government, the result has instead been an all-out regional war. 
Neither side has shown any willingness to step back. U.S. Secretary of War Pete Hegseth said on 
Wednesday that the conflict could last up to eight weeks. Ali Larijani, Iran's security chief, has ruled 
out talks with the U.S. and American media have reported that Washington is considering arming ethnic 
Kurdish militias in Iran's northwest to provoke internal unrest. This is a dangerous game. It appears that 
Mr. Trump launched the war without an exit strategy. As the Iranian state and its institutions show no 
signs of cracking, the U.S. has turned to massive bombardment and the prospect of fuelling civil strife 
in a country that it promised to "liberate" from clerical rule only days ago. If the war drags on, Mr. Trump 
is likely to face growing domestic resistance, with sections of his far-right base already calling it "Israel's 
war". For India, rising oil and gas prices will add to the burden on its economy, while a widening war 
could threaten the economic and physical security of the millions of Indians living in the region. New 
Delhi, which initially did not condemn the assassination of Khamenei, the leader of a friendly country, 
should take a more emphatic stand against the war and work with other powers to de-escalate the 
conflict. India should also strongly oppose U.S. attempts to bring the war to its backyard. 
S