Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 149

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Deflect 
A. united 
2. Redaction 
B. divert 
3. Unanimous 
C. yielding 
4. Concession 
D. fighting 
5. Battling 
E. editing 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- D 

            Overcoming resistance: On the National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance 
(2025-29) 
Version 2 of the National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance requires fresh 
commitment 
The introduction of the second iteration of the National Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance 
is an acknowledgement that, but for some marginal gains, implementation of version 1 was, at 
best, sluggish. In a welcome move, the Centre has released a further version of the policy, 
though the details are not yet available in the public realm, to give the nation a booster shot at 
trying to fix the rather humongous AMR problem that the country has had to contend with, increasing 
volumes to boot. In October, WHO released its Global antibiotic resistance surveillance report, which 
recorded that in 2023, approximately one in three bacterial infections in India were resistant to 
commonly-used antibiotics. Globally, it was one in six confirmed infections. It spelt out why India was 
disproportionately affected - factors included a high infectious disease burden, overuse and misuse of 
antibiotics and gaps in the surveillance and healthcare infrastructure. E.coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae 
have exhibited high resistance to critical antibiotics, making the very last line of drugs ineffective. But 
human health is not the sole footprint AMR possesses; there is scarcely a field in the food chain where 
its cold arms have not touched - from veterinary practices to contaminating soil and water health and, 
thereby, agriculture and aquaculture. This ubiquitous spread of AMR has spurred scientists to push the 
One Health technique - it integrates the prisms of human health, animal health and environmental 
health - to handle growing resistance in communities. 
The time is, no doubt, ripe for India to take AMR seriously and push for an enhanced, committed 
antibiotics stewardship programme. While the first National Action Plan played a key role in raising the 
profile of AMR, the actual implementation suffered. It is true that the country expanded its national 
surveillance programme by adding a solid laboratory network (thanks, in part, to the COVID-19 
pandemic), it also scored a win with the ban on Colistin as a growth factor in the animal husbandry 
sector. However, the programme flailed as it failed to secure potent collaborations with States. A few 
States drew up their own policies, but only Kerala implemented it well enough to see a slight drop in 
AMR levels in the community, recently. This policy will have to tackle every aspect of AMR's causative 
factors, including the rampant overuse and misuse of antibiotics. The One Health approach will have to 
be strengthened, and better co-ordination with States ensured. This time around, the policy will have to 
be the real deal and deliver, against resistance. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Mitigation 
A. biased 
2. Untenable 
B. reduction 
3. Mandate 
C. indefensible 
4. Discriminatory 
D. permanent 
5. Irreversible 
E. order 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- C 
3- E 
4- A 
5- D 

            Epstein exposure: On Trump and the Epstein files 
Trump might have a lot to lose politically from the revelations 
fter battling political exposure for months, U.S. President Donald Trump has finally signed a 
Bill passed by Congress mandating the Department of Justice (DoJ) to release files relating 
to the investigation of sex offender and disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, who died in 
prison in 2019. The President's assent was effectively his concession to enormous 
pressure from both sides of the political divide, Democrats and Republicans, who had 
mounted a strong campaign to shine a light upon Epstein's communications including those with or 
mentioning Mr. Trump. With the House of Representatives passing the Epstein-related legislation by a 
427-1 vote, and the Senate granting unanimous consent to pass the same, there was no avoiding 
presidential approval for the demand to reveal detailed documentation regarding a man who was 
convicted of soliciting prostitution from a minor and died by suicide before facing charges relating to sex 
trafficking of minors. The DoJ has to release within 30 days all files stemming from the investigation of 
Epstein, with redactions allowed only for details of his victims but not for details of others that may 
cause any "embarrassment, reputational harm, or political sensitivity". 
The broader context to the turn in the Epstein saga is the established fact of Mr. Trump's friendship 
with Epstein, even though the President has refuted all knowledge of Epstein's criminal activities and that 
The severed relations years ago. Indeed, even though there was no mention of suggested criminality, Mr. 
Trump's name was writ large in the 20,000 pages of documents from Epstein's estate that congressional 
lawmakers released recently. The information suggests that Epstein did communicate with several other 
noted social elites including former Prince Andrew of the U.K., Mr. Trump's former adviser Steve 
Bannon, and former Harvard president Larry Summers. In what appeared to be a bid to deflect attention 
away from himself and his associates while acceding to the demand to release the files, Mr. Trump has 
also said that he would direct Attorney General Pam Bondi to investigate the links that Epstein might 
have to former President Bill Clinton, JPMorgan and Chase banks, and LinkedIn founder Reid Hoffman, 
a Democratic donor. Whatever insights the files reveal, it is clear that Mr. Trump has had an association 
with a high-society criminal guilty of sex crimes against minors and likely against women too. The 
question is whether voters, especially women in his conservative base of supporters, will consider this 
association sufficient grounds to back away from Mr. Trump and from MAGA politics more generally. 
A