Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 220

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Reiteration 
A. inconsistencies 
2. Eliminated 
B. pretense 
3. Discrepancies 
C. aware 
4. Guise 
D. repetition 
5. Conscious 
E. removed 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Incomplete truce: On the Israel-Lebanon ceasefire 
Israel has to pull back troops from Lebanon for peace to take hold 
The new ceasefire agreement between Israel and Lebanon could help remove a major 
obstacle to U.S. President Donald Trump's efforts to secure a preliminary agreement with Iran 
to end the war. Last week, Iran suspended talks with the U.S. in protest against Israel's 
escalating war in Lebanon. In April, when Mr. Trump announced an Israel-Lebanon ceasefire, 
The had said that Israel was "prevented" from attacking the country any longer. But Tel Aviv 
continued air strikes and expanded ground operations in southern Lebanon. Iran has maintained that in 
its April 8 ceasefire with the U.S., Washington had promised that the ceasefire would come into force on 
all fronts, including Lebanon. Now, after Iran paused talks with the U.S., Mr. Trump swung into action. 
He claimed that he had talked Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu out of his plans to bomb Beirut 
and had a conversation with Hezbollah's representatives, who agreed "not to shoot". The Israel-Lebanon 
ceasefire statement followed Mr. Trump's announcement. Mr. Trump's firm diplomatic intervention, 
which reportedly included an expletive-laden call with Mr. Netanyahu, points to the importance he gives 
to the diplomatic process. Before the Lebanon crisis flared up, the U.S. and Iran were negotiating a 
memorandum of understanding to reopen the Strait of Hormuz and remove the U.S. blockade of Iranian 
ports, which would set the stage for negotiations on Iran's nuclear programme. 
While the ceasefire agreement is welcome, it remains fragile and incomplete, leaving the conflict's key 
problems unaddressed. The actual fighting in Lebanon is between Israel and Hezbollah. The Lebanese 
government is not a party to the conflict and Hezbollah does not report to the Lebanese army. But 
Hezbollah was not part of the negotiations. The ceasefire agreement requires Hezbollah to unilaterally 
cease attacks, but it does not ask Israel to make concessions. Hezbollah says it would stop fighting 
only if Israel withdraws from southern Lebanon. Israel, which has made its deepest incursions into 
southern Lebanon since its 2000 withdrawal, is not talking about any withdrawal plan. Israel has also 
broken all its ceasefire agreements in recent years. Despite a truce deal, it continues to bomb Gaza. Mr. 
Trump's announcement of a new ceasefire despite an existing one highlights the fragility of the truce. 
What he is trying to do is to bring in a stop-gap arrangement in Lebanon to push his planned deal with 
Iran. But for this to work, he should get firm commitments from Israel that it would not break the terms. 
For a lasting truce in Lebanon, Israel has to end its illegal occupation of the south and pull back its 
troops. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Rebuke 
A. huge 
2. Retrofitted 
B. tactical 
3. Reimburse 
C. reprimand 
4. Strategic 
D. repay 
5. Vast 
E. upgraded 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- D 
4- B 
5- A 

            New and raw: On Nepal-India ties 
Nepal and India must avoid misspeaking on border issues 
The visit of Nepal Foreign Minister Shisir Khanal to Delhi, which followed right after the visit of 
Nepal's new ruling party RSP's President Rabi Lamichhane and ahead of a proposed visit by 
the new Finance Minister Swarnim Wagle, signals an intense outreach between Delhi and 
Kathmandu's new leadership. Mr. Khanal had met External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar in 
April, on the sidelines of an Indian Ocean regional conference in Mauritius, but this was his 
first visit to India since the RSP and newly elected Prime Minister Balen Shah took power after the GenZ 
protests. The meetings, a lead up to an expected India visit by Mr. Shah, indicate a step-by-step 
approach to building ties, with Delhi laying out the red carpet for Mr. Lamichhane, who met with top 
functionaries of the BJP, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the Home Minister, Mr. Jaishankar and the 
National Security Adviser. These meetings came just after Mr. Shah's address to his Parliament where 
The accused India of occupying parts of Nepal while also claiming that Nepal is in control of parts of 
Indian territory, and much to New Delhi's outrage, added that Nepal was in touch with the U.K. and 
China on the issue. Such comments by Mr. Shah, and his decision to stick to protocol and refuse a 
meeting with India's Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri, no doubt ruffled feathers, and Mr. Lamichhane's 
first task was to smooth feelings on the issue. In a media meet, Mr. Khanal also sought to diffuse the 
tensions, suggesting that the Nepal government was committed to turning a page in Nepali politics, and 
casting aside "old baggage" with India. The MEA rejected any role for a "third party" in negotiations, 
particularly China, given that Mr. Khanal's next visit is to Beijing. No doubt, the territorial issues over 
Limpiyadhura, and Lipulekh will heat up again this summer as India sends more groups over the border 
areas which Kathmandu claims, for the Kailash Mansarovar Yatra to Tibet. 
The agenda between India and Nepal is at present too broad and too deep, from border management 
and renegotiating water sharing agreements to infrastructure, trade development projects and energy 
sharing, to be derailed at this point. While Nepal's new government may be granted some leeway for 
early misspeaking, Kathmandu and Delhi must tread carefully in their words and steps. Any indication 
from Kathmandu that it is cavalier about India's position in the region, or from Delhi that it seeks to 
interfere with the new government's working, could set off the same cycles of mistrust that have 
dogged the relationship, particularly since the Nepal Constitution friction and trade blockade from India 
in 2015. While the Modi government's diplomatic tasks have been made more complex by youth protests 
that have dislodged entrenched power structures in the Maldives, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Nepal, 
T

            this may also be an important opportunity to rework its discourse and partnership framework with 
smaller yet important neighbours in South Asia.