Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 164

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Fragile 
A. imposing 
2. Robust 
B. weak 
3. Touted 
C. strong 
4. Levying 
D. delicate 
5. Flimsy 
E. promoted 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- E 
4- A 
5- B 

            Gates and windows: On the SIR and single-appeal window 
One round of appeals cannot fix the large-scale deletions in electoral rolls 
The Election Commission of India (ECI)'s Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls has 
a reasonable aim: to prune the duplicates, outdated addresses and entries for people who 
have died or moved, which India's electoral rolls have a tendency to gather. But the ECI's 
design of the ongoing SIR, modelled on the one in Bihar, infuses systemic flaws in the 
process that the body seems unwilling to address or even acknowledge despite many of the 
same problems in Bihar reappearing in multiple States. The process is happening at great speed that, 
together with the burden of inclusion being shifted from the state to the voter, suggests that the ECI is 
treating the exclusion of eligible voters as an acceptable risk. The speed would be justifiable given the 
availability of digital technologies today but they have their own tendencies to exclude, exemplified by 
the fact that the 2002-2005 electoral rolls, details from which the ongoing SIR expects citizens to 
invoke, are not machine-readable and the ECI has treated even minor mismatches as cause for deletion. 
The scale of exclusions reported in the phase I draft rolls should thus be read as a warning sign. It is 
not obviously reasonable to expect that one round of appeals will fix this in the final rolls. 
The claims and objections processes correct errors only to the extent that affected voters detect and 
pursue them. That is, the appeals stage only adds a new filter, selecting for those with the time, literacy, 
connectivity, social support and confidence to deal with the state. If a person does not realise they have 
been deleted, cannot take time away from work, travel to an office, assemble documents or navigate 
forms and hearings, the error will become an official fact. Important information is not consistently 
available in a form that enables real-time public scrutiny, such as the precise reasons for deletions at 
granular levels and demographic breakups, including gender-wise patterns, preventing civil society, 
smaller political parties, journalists and voters from identifying where the process is failing while it can 
still be corrected. Finally, the SIR depends on house-to-house work, form distribution and collection, 
digitisation and repeated visits executed by State staff who simultaneously have other duties. When they 
are further constrained by tight deadlines, the risk of chasing targets instead of completing tasks 
becomes great. The current SIR in sum comes across as a form of administrative gatekeeping that 
stratifies the electorate into two tiers: those who can continuously re-prove themselves in the state's 
preferred format and those who cannot. That outcome will not be corrected by a single-appeal window 
because the window is itself part of the gate. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Spurious 
A. participated 
2. Disrupted 
B. citing 
3. Indulged 
C. coercion 
4. Invoking 
D. fake 
5. Intimidation 
E. interrupted 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Model conduct: On India, AI use 
India must improve access to AI resources, and upskill its workforce 
India has been regulating Artificial Intelligence (AI) use by expecting due diligence from platforms 
under the IT Act and Rules, regulating the financial sector, and with privacy and data protection 
Rules. It does not yet have a consumer safety regime that deals with the state's duty of care. China 
pitched such a regime with draft rules that it unveiled last week, which target emotionally 
interactive services, and propose to require companies to warn against excessive use and 
intervene when they detect signs of extreme emotional states. If these rules seem justified for targeting 
psychological dependence that general rules about unlawful content do not address, they may also be 
harsh because expecting providers to identify users' states can incentivise more intimate monitoring. 
India's posture is less intrusive, but also more incomplete, because it banks on existing laws. Thus, it 
regulates adjacent risks but has not articulated a duty of care vis-à-vis AI product safety, especially for 
psychological harms. MeitY has used the IT Rules to push platforms to curb deepfakes and fraud, and 
define and label "synthetically generated" content. Financial regulators have also adopted structural 
measures, with the RBI setting expectations to govern model risk in credit and developing its FREE-AI 
framework process and SEBI pushing for clear accountability on how regulated entities use AI tools. 
While some measures are preemptive, MeitY has been largely reactive. 
India has a large ecosystem that adopts models but is far behind the U.S. and China in building frontier 
models of its own. In this context, it should beware the cons of 'regulate first, build later', especially since 
domestic capacity is lacking. A more practical way might be to consider how it can nurture a frontier 
model and govern the overall use of models, many of which will remain privately built and foreign for a 
while, inside Indian markets. On the first count, India can focus on improving access to computational 
resources, upskilling the workforce, increasing public procurement, and translating research to industry 
while sidestepping the pitfall of paralysis by consensus, which could increase dependency. On the 
second, India should consider regulating downstream use more assertively without choking upstream 
capability. It can do this by adding obligations on companies that are deploying products in high-risk 
contexts, and regulating how they monitor and respond to a model's behaviour, to existing privacy and 
consumer protection rules, for example, by expecting companies to submit incident reports, rather than 
requiring them to monitor users' emotions. This way, India can write rules for how Indians use models 
without assuming that the global technology trajectory will rearrange itself to match its preferences. 
I