Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 169

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Extract 
A. based 
2. Premised 
B. destruction 
3. Propagate 
C. curse 
4. Scourge 
D. remove 
5. Depredation 
E. spread 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- C 
5- B 

            Letter against the spirit: On the Election Commission, barring foreigners 
The Election Commission of India's mandate is to ensure no Indian is 
disenfranchised 
The Election Commission of India (ECI) has told the Supreme Court of India that it has a 
constitutional duty to ensure that only citizens are enrolled as voters, and that no foreigner 
makes it to the electoral rolls. Even a single foreigner cannot be allowed to exist on the voter 
list, the ECI argued before the Court on January 6. The ECI is defending its ongoing Special 
Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls, which has struck off millions of names of voters. 
The concerns raised by all Opposition parties, legal scholars and civil society relate to the evident 
burden and harassment being caused to ordinary citizens of the republic in having to prove their 
existence and identity. Nobody has argued for the inclusion of any foreigner, or for keeping electoral rolls 
as they are today - faulty and impossible to navigate. At the heart of this debate is the relation between 
the ECI's claims and the process. Over many decades, the ECI has consistently grown its institutional 
integrity - despite occasional slippages - by expanding the franchise not merely as a formality but also 
as a substantive right. The maxim that no amount of escaped criminals justifies the punishment of a 
single innocent person has resonance in this context. In a leap into the phantom world of foreigners 
taking over the country, the real challenges to the integrity of India's electoral process are being 
overlooked. Or, maybe, the foreigner paranoia is being whipped up as a facade for polarization. 
That Article 324 of the Constitution grants the ECI independent "control over the preparation of electoral 
rolls" is not contested. The concern is that the ECI is not acting independently and in a manner that 
boosts confidence in the electoral process. The litmus test of an electoral process - very much like a 
judicial process - is whether the side that loses still trusts the process. Unfortunately for India, the 
current ECI has its priorities turned on their head when it frames its constitutional duty as the removal 
of foreigners, and not the enrolment of every Indian citizen. While several authorities have a duty to look 
for foreigners, only the ECI has the duty to enrol Indian citizens as voters. Through changes in rules and 
their partisan application, the ECI has undermined its own stature and the sacred duty assigned to it by 
the Constitution in the recent past. Now, by unleashing avoidable suffering and inconvenience upon 
Indian citizens under the garb of chasing the last foreigner, it is misreading the letter and ignoring the 
spirit of its constitutional duty. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
COLUMN A 
COLUMN B 
1. PHANTOM 
A. CLEAR 
2. UNDERMINED 
B. PROTECTING 
3. EVIDENT 
C. RELEASING 
4. UNLEASHING 
D. IMAGINARY 
5. DEFENDING 
E. WEAKENED 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- B 
Shrill reactions: India's cricketing ties with its subcontinental neighbours 
India's cricket is being held hostage to political compulsions 
aught in a crossfire, India's cricketing tieswith its subcontinental neighbours arein a free fall. If 
border tensions with Pakistan and the scourge of terrorism affected sporting links across the 
Wagah, turbulence within Bangladesh and extreme reactions to it within India, have turned 
out to be another stumbling block. The ghastly lynchingof members of the minority Hindu 
community in Bangladesh drewrightful condemnation across the Indian landscape, and yet 
the reflexive sporting churn should have been avoided. In a social media age wherein 
violence and insults tend to get amplified, the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) 
responded prematurely in forcing Kolkata Knight Riders (KKR) to release its Bangladeshi left-arm 
seamer Mustafizur Rahman. That the Indian Premier League (IPL) is only commencing on March 26 and 
much water would have flowed down by then in the Ganges and the Padma, was lost on the officials. 
The Bangladesh Cricket Board (BCB) was quick in its rejoinder. A security threat to its squad was 
propped up as an excuse and a missive was sent to the International Cricket Council (ICC) to relocate 
Bangladesh's games in the forthcoming ICC T20 World Cup, away from host India. Bangladesh also 
proposed a ban on the telecast of the IPL in the country. 
C 

            With the T20 World Cup launching on February 7 in India and Sri Lanka, a last minute scrambling for 
venues will be difficult. Incidentally, Pakistan's games are slotted in Sri Lanka and even its big contest 
against India will be staged at Colombo on February 15. With Bangladesh set to play four preliminary 
league games in India, a reallocation will affect hosting logistics. This is a conundrum that could have 
been avoided had the BCCI waited for the hostile tide to turn. The tiesthat bind India and Bangladesh, a 
nation birthed through the assistance of the former in 1971, now standfrayed. Diplomacy is a complex 
interplay of adjustment and pragmatism. The deposed former Bangladesh Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina 
sought refuge and was granted one in Delhi, while the Indian government also paid its last respects to 
her arch-rival and former Prime Minister, the late Khaleda Zia. The ICC chairman, Jay Shah, has an 
unenviable task of maintaining neutrality while dealing with the present crisis. The shrill reactionson 
either side of the borderneedto be tempered; sport should not be handcuffed by political compulsions.