Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 257

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Inspection 
A. imaginary 
2. Fictitious 
B. restricted 
3. Boom 
C. intensified 
4. Confined 
D. scrutiny 
5. Amplified 
E. surge 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Endurance test: On the Indian economy's resilience 
The quarters ahead will test the stamina of India's economic resilience 
India's economic growth during the first quarter of this financial year has surprised most people. 
Against a perception among economists that growth would slow to about 6%-7% on account of 
the impact of the West Asia crisis, real growth in the April-June 2026 quarter came in at a robust 
7.8%. This was not a statistical anomaly, either, as growth was underpinned by strong 
performances in both manufacturing and services. In fact, the manufacturing sector grew at a 
three-quarter-high of 9.2%. The sector has likely benefited from the Goods and Services Tax rate cut 
implemented last September, and further from the Reserve Bank of India's (RBI) 125-basis point 
cumulative interest rate cuts through 2025. A part of it is also that companies likely front-loaded their 
output in the expectation of further uncertainty on inflation, potential future rate hikes, and other possible 
headwinds. The other piece of good news is that capital creation seems to have picked up. While it is 
not yet clear what the share is between the government and the private sector, capital creation overall 
has a welcome multiplier effect on the economy. The services sector, too, has continued to see robust 
growth, adding strength to the economy. Yet, the economy is not out of the woods, and this robust 
performance will be more difficult to replicate in the quarters ahead. As Chief Economic Adviser V. 
Anantha Nageswaran has cautioned, Hormuz uncertainty is likely to keep oil prices above $80 a barrel, 
too high for a country that imports 85%-90% of its oil requirement. 
This is perhaps why Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday reiterated his appeal to Indians to buy 
local, avoid non-essential foreign travel and weddings abroad, and stop unnecessary purchases of gold. 
The pressure of maintaining a reasonable trade deficit has so far rested on India's services exports. 
This has served India reasonably well so far, but the global economy is stuttering. This, combined with 
the growth of Artificial Intelligence services elsewhere, could hurt demand for Indian services exports 
going ahead. The economy is also yet to face the full brunt of a deficient monsoon and the impact this 
will have on rural demand. The consumption-related data for July in the Index of Industrial Production 
already points to sluggish rural demand. While inflation remains well within the RBI's comfort zone, it 
has been increasing. The RBI expects it to hit 5.9% in October-December 2026, which would further hit 
demand. The front-loading of manufacturing will also, by definition, peter out over the next few quarters. 
The strength of the Indian economy's resilience was tested in Q1 and it passed admirably. However, 
the much tougher stamina test remains. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Replicate 
A. faltering 
2. Sluggish 
B. obstacles 
3. Headwinds 
C. lethargic 
4. Perception 
D. imitate 
5. Stuttering 
E. viewpoint 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- B 
4- E 
5- A 

            Many layers: On onion produce, issues 
Farmers need more storage facilities and better distribution networks 
ince the 1960s, India has developed a balancing-act habit: between keeping food prices 
affordably low for consumers and assuring farmers of remunerative prices, with the state's 
interventions focused on managing this volatility in the short term. This is also why the 
government banned onion exports from December 2023 to May 2024, then imposed a 
$550/tonne minimum export price and a 40% export duty, reduced the duty to 20% in 
September 2024, and finally abolished it in April 2025. But erratic weather together with the lack of long-
term relief has rendered the act increasingly awkward. From farmers' point of view, the government often 
changes its mind after they have made important production-related decisions based on the expected 
price. On the other hand, during the bounteous rabi harvest, onion farmers in Maharashtra, the country's 
principal supplier, had argued that the Centre's procurement price of ₹12.35/kg would not cover the costs 
of cultivation. The Centre subsequently raised the price to up to 26.45/kg, but many farmers - including 
some who had had to sell at ₹1/kg earlier because of low quality and lack of storage, among other 
factors were unable to capture the higher value, exposing the limits of intervening after prices have 
already collapsed and not reaching all farmers or grades of produce. 
While the government has alluded to some price manipulation, the dominant issue remains that it keeps 
reacting instead of taking proactive measures, including improving storage options, maintaining a less 
erratic trade policy, moving stock more efficiently between regions, and protecting farmers against price 
shocks. The abnormal rainfall at the time of harvest and a 5%-7% drop in the kharif crop in Maharashtra, 
together with the well-known challenges associated with storing onions and maintaining large buffers, 
are simply among the pressures that highlighted the flaw this year. Further, Tamil Nadu's targeted 
subsidy, to buy 1,000 tonnes of onions to distribute 1 kg per ration card at 35, will impose pressures on 
the Centre to maintain a steady supply. The move is commendably designed to discourage hoarding 
while allowing private retail prices to cool down. However, the State must also guard against the pitfalls 
of distributing onions through a dry-grain PDS network its economic case could collapse if post-harvest 
losses, to which onion is more susceptible than, say, wheat or rice, exceed 10%-15% and if the need 
arises to persist with the subsidy. Finally, if other States also adopt similar measures, the Central buffer 
could be quickly exhausted, more so given this year's high storage losses of around 30%. 
S