Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 236

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Tilted 
A. revival 
2. Shrift 
B. leaned 
3. Surge 
C. tied 
4. Resuscitation 
D. punishment 
5. Strapped 
E. rise 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- E 
4- A 
5- C 

            Steady in turbulence: On India's Australia, New Zealand ties 
India must build partnerships in this age of global turmoil 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's recent visits to Australia and New Zealand marked yet 
another step in India's efforts to consolidate partnerships across the Indo-Pacific. India's 
relations with both countries have traditionally been largely economic and people-centric, but 
the visits underscored an increased emphasis on strategic aspects, a fresh turn. 
Geopolitical competition, manifested in supply-chain disruptions and the realignment of 
global economic networks, is keeping the world on tenterhooks, and India has to manage the 
uncertainties and volatility well to be able to protect its vital interests. The visits reflected New Delhi's 
attempt to strengthen the southern arc of the Indo-Pacific under its Act East Policy, MAHASAGAR 
(Mutual and Holistic Advancement for Security and Growth Across Regions) vision, and commitment to a 
free, open and inclusive Indo-Pacific. India and Australia adopted a new Joint Declaration on Defence 
and Security Cooperation, significantly upgrading the existing security framework. They agreed to 
enhance interoperability between their armed forces, expand military exercises, establish an Annual 
Defence Ministers' Dialogue, and strengthen cooperation in cybersecurity, maritime security and 
emerging technologies. An India-Australia Maritime Security Collaboration Roadmap was unveiled to 
deepen information sharing and operational coordination in the Indo-Pacific. An immediate and 
consequential outcome was Australia's decision to allow uranium exports for India's civilian nuclear 
programme, removing a lingering obstacle in ties and boosting India's clean-energy ambitions. Both 
countries will also find new avenues of cooperation on critical minerals, a specific field of global 
uncertainty. 
India-New Zealand relations are now a formal strategic partnership, with a road map for cooperation over 
the next four years. Key agreements announced by the countries include maritime cooperation in the 
Indo-Pacific and mutual logistics support between the Indian Navy and the New Zealand Defence 
Force. Building upon the recently concluded India-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement, both sides 
agreed to aim for a substantial expansion of bilateral trade by 2030. Avenues for agricultural 
cooperation are also being explored. India shares with Australia and New Zealand a concern about 
maintaining stability and predictability in the Indo-Pacific. Supply-chain diversification, energy security, 
and access to critical minerals and emerging technology are key priorities for India, which is trying to 
protect its strategic autonomy in a world of great volatility. The Modi government has been trying to 
achieve this objective through building a network of partnerships. These visits fit into that pattern. India's 
P

            challenge is in keeping itself steady in an era of global turmoil, and untangled from rivalries that can 
do it no good. Mr. Modi's visits build on this awareness.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Manifested 
A. persistent 
2. Avenues 
B. strengthen 
3. Lingering 
C. chaos 
4. Consolidate 
D. showed 
5. Turmoil 
E. options 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Export gains: On India's trade data for June 
India's trade weaknesses are becoming episodic while strengths are turning 
structural 
India's trade data for June offers insights into how the country is weathering the West Asia crisis 
and the prospect of a deficient monsoon. The fact that the trade deficit jumped 430% in June 
would seem alarming. However, a deeper look at the composition of this deficit should ease a 
lot of that alarm. The bulk of the increase in the deficit was due to the sharp increase in 
merchandise imports in June. And within this, it was led by crude, gold, fertilizers and electronic 
goods. [O] The value of crude oil [A]/ reflecting the skyrocketing prices of [B]/ imports rose 40% in June 
2026, [C]/ oil a few months earlier [D]. Gold prices have also been rising as uncertainty over the West 
Asia situation persists. The doubling of gold import duties in May would also have pushed up prices in 
June. With India's natural gas supplies hit due to the West Asia constraints, it has had to import more 
fertilizer 201% more by value over last June. The only one of these categories that has seen imports rise 
sharply due to domestic factors is the electronic goods segment. As India's electronics manufacturing 
and assembly grow, more parts are going to come from abroad to fuel this engine. The government is 
encouraging this, as seen in its decision last week to remove the basic customs duty on imported parts 
in the manufacture of display assemblies, lithium-ion cells and inductor coil modules. [N] These are [A] 
wants if India [B] essential to [C] boost its [D] manufacturing of high-end electronics such as 
smartphones, laptops and smart TVs. Going ahead, the attempt should also be to manufacture as many 
of these inputs locally so that these supply chains can be made truly secure. 
The good news is that India's merchandise exports have put on a strong showing, not only in June 2026, 
but throughout the first quarter of 2026-27. Merchandise exports grew 15.5% in June and by an even 
quicker 16% in Q1. This was not simply a buoyancy granted by costly petroleum exports, either. Non-
petroleum exports grew by a robust 16.5% in June and 12.4% in Q1. This is almost precisely the 
duration of the West Asia crisis. The data show that India's exports to every region of the world except 
West Asia grew in Q1, and that a large portion of export growth was in volume terms as well as in value. 
[M] Indian [P] exporters are to be [Q] commended for [R] diversifying so quickly. Service exports, 
however, grew only 2.9% in June and 6.2% in Q1. As Chief Economic Adviser V. Anantha Nageswaran 
has warned, success in areas such as Global Capability Centres should not be considered an end in 
itself - there is still far to go, and complacency will rob India of its advantage in this area. 
I