Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 268

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Annihilation 
A. disappointment 
2. Unwieldy 
B. supervise 
3. Hegemony  
C. destruction 
4. Oversee 
D. unmanageable 
5. Chagrin 
E. dominance 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            New equilibrium: on the recalibration of U.S. -China ties 
As the United States and China recalibrate ties, implications for other nations are 
huge 
In the surface, Chinese President Xi Jinping's Washington visit appeared to be more about 
ceremony than substance. President Donald Trump rolled out the red carpet, personally 
welcoming the Chinese leader at the base where he landed. The last time that a U.S. 
President accorded such an honour to a foreign leader was when John F. Kennedy 
welcomed British Prime Minister Harold MacMillan in 1962. Mr. Trump also laid out a 
grand state dinner at the White House, inviting some of the biggest names in tech and business in the 
U.S. Beyond the optics, the concrete outcomes from the Trump-Xi talks were modest. The most 
immediate one was an agreement for both leaders to meet twice this year at the APEC summit in 
Shenzhen and the G-20 in Miami, marking an unusual four meetings in one year, with Mr. Trump having 
visited Beijing in May. Both sides also agreed to operationalize a board of trade and investment. No 
new trade agreement was reached, although both have extended for another two months the trade 
truce agreed to at Busan last year as well as an arrangement for a $30 billion reciprocal tariff reduction. 
China reaffirmed its commitment to buy $17 billion worth of agricultural products annually, but offered no 
new ones. Other long pending issues such as semiconductors, rare earths and U.S. arms sales to 
Taiwan appear deferred for now. Both did, however, announce the establishment of a new dialogue on 
Artificial Intelligence and the opening of a channel for incidents, amid growing concerns over the 
consequences of an unregulated AI race. 
The modest outcomes from the Xi visit should not obscure the broader shift that recent U.S.-China 
engagement has underlined. The agreement between the world's two biggest powers to pursue what 
they call a constructive relationship of strategic stability based on fairness, respect and reciprocity 
points to a new equilibrium. Their relationship certainly remains beset by serious structural challenges 
and will remain one marked by rivalry. At the same time, both sides appear eager to set a floor to 
ensure a rivalry that is more managed, stable and predictable. Countries in the region will be watching 
closely how this may temper an "America First" Washington's appetite to push back against China in 
waters far from home. New Delhi will need to carefully watch this evolving new equilibrium. The recent 
U.S. tariff threats aimed at India have offered a stark contrast to the measured language with which 
Washington has been engaging Beijing. For long, a strand of Indian strategic thinking has been 
predicated on the assumption that U.S. strategy in the region was centred on the idea of a relationship 
O

            with India as a bulwark against Chinese influence. That assumption increasingly appears open to 
question.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Truce 
A. harass 
2. Beset 
B. enormous 
3. Deferred 
C. ceasefire 
4. Eager 
D. postponed 
5. Huge 
E. enthusiastic 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- D 
4- E 
5- B 

            Waves of rain: on Odisha and intense rain events 
Odisha must prepare for repeated bouts of intense downpour 
disha is experiencing one of its most intense monsoons, recording 1,453 mm of rainfall 
between June and September 25 this year, a 29% excess. The reason is the unusually 
large number of atmospheric systems, including 11 over the Bay of Bengal, the latest 
making landfall near Kalingapatnam on September 23. The IMD had forecast that India 
would receive 90% of the long-period average partly because an El Niño was expected to 
develop; the State had finished June itself with a 47% deficit. However, rainfall in the region came to be 
dominated by the weather systems, which also repeatedly delivered rain without giving locals time to 
recover. By the State's estimates, 5.2 lakh people had been affected by July 30 and another 13.5 lakh by 
August 27. At least 60 locations have so far received more than 100 mm of rain in 24 hours, with the 
runoff swelling multiple rivers and threatening more floods downstream, including in Bhadrak and 
Jajpur, and landslides in hilly areas. When a previous bout of rain has already saturated the soil and 
topped local storage, a new bout could lead more immediately to runoff. While the State's south is 
predominantly highland and confronts slope failure risks, its coast is a depositional plain of multiple 
deltas, rendering a terrain with low gradient through which water does not readily drain into the sea. 
The efficacy of the State's long-standing policy to have zero casualties remains to be seen, especially 
given the extent to which the ongoing season will stress the drain design and maintenance deficiencies 
that the CAG had flagged in 2024. Other important data include the eventual crop and infrastructure 
damage assessments and the peak levels of the Baitarani, Budhabalanga, Jalaka, and Rushikulya rivers 
after the 11th system fades. A study in May by the Odisha University of Agriculture and Technology, 
based on data from 1901-2020, reported that both maximum one-day and five-day rainfall bursts were 
becoming more common even as the frequency of heavy-rain days was dipping. The State has been 
renowned for its disaster management protocols. However, the recurrent waterlogging in urban hubs 
such as Berhampur and the disruption of inter-State highways and rail networks suggest that its 
evacuation protocols outpace its civic engineering, with significant room to improve socio-economic and 
infrastructural resilience. Climate change is also increasingly correlated with more protracted monsoon 
withdrawal and intense rain events. Taken together, Odisha needs to pivot from anticipating isolated 
seasonal anomalies to preparing for repeated intense downpours. 
O