Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 253

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Oversight 
A. traditional 
2. Infructuous 
B. reduce 
3. Worrisome 
C. supervision 
4. Curtail 
D. futile 
5. Conventional 
E. alarming 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Core concerns: On the Indian economy, the road ahead 
The Indian economy looks set for tough times ahead 
The slowdown in the growth of India's core industrial sectors in July was not surprising, with 
other indicators predicting easing demand conditions as well. Growth in the index of core 
industries (ICI) slowed to 5.4% in July from 6% in the previous month. This was in keeping 
with the Manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index, which in July eased to its lowest level 
since August 2021 due to weak domestic demand conditions. While July's growth in the ICI 
was the second-highest growth rate in the last seven months, the data nevertheless highlight some 
concerning aspects of the Indian economy. The first has to do with the fact that a large part of even this 
slower growth seems to be based on a statistical low base effect. The coal sector, for example, grew at 
an 11-month high of 7.6% in July, but this was based on a contraction of 12.3% in July of last year. 
Similarly, the refinery products sector snapped a three-month streak of contraction to grow at 2.7%, but 
this too was based on a contraction in July 2025. The iron ore sector, however, grew at a very robust 
29.5%, albeit slower than a blistering 44.5% in June. This seems heartening regardless of the 
contractions of 16.4% and 7.1% in June and July of last year, respectively. But the steel sector slowed 
drastically in July to 2.9% from 5.6% in June and 15.7% in July of last year. 
The domestic crude oil and natural gas sectors have been lasting drags on the economy. Both have 
contracted continuously for at least the last 14 months for which the new series of the ICI has data. 
India's crude oil imports rose 13.3% in volume terms in July, while Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) imports 
grew a more marginal 1.5%, showing that the economy's appetite is being whetted from abroad. This 
external dependence is proving very expensive. High oil prices have meant that the crude oil import bill 
jumped 41% in July. The 100% tariffs that the United States is preparing to levy on countries such as 
India that import Russian oil will once again burden Indian exporters. Moving to 20% ethanol-blending 
has not yet impacted oil imports materially. Within the ICI, the only two bright spots of the economy 
were the cement and electricity sectors. The electricity sector grew at a robust 9% in July, although this 
was slower than the two consecutive months of double-digit growth in May and June thanks to the 
prevalent heatwave conditions in many parts of the country. The cement sector sped up to 13.1%, a 
welcome acceleration. Such positive trends were few and far between. Overall, the Indian economy 
looks to be in for a period of slack demand, higher costs, and moderating growth. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Blistering 
A. decline 
2. Appetite 
B. sharpened 
3. Contraction 
C. encouraging 
4. Whetted 
D. craving 
5. Heartening 
E. intense 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Perfect host: On India as host of the 2026 BWF World Championships 
India was successful as a host of badminton World Championships 
The 2026 BWF World Championships in New Delhi marked the rise of France as an on-court 
force and of India as a capable host. Alex Lanier's triumph in singles, and Thom Gicquel and 
Delphine Delrue's in mixed doubles, were the first golds in France's history. [P] A worthy 
runner-up to China [A]/ that the European nation finished [B]/ the de facto World Cup in 
badminton [C]/ in the Thomas Cup, [D]/ it was just over three months ago [E]. The Worlds 
success has established France as a serious contender in a sport otherwise dominated by Asian 
countries. In fact, Lanier is just the third non-Asian this century - after Spain's Carolina Marin and 
Denmark's Viktor Axelsen to win the singles gold at the World Championships. The 21-year-old did that 
at a spruced-up Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium, which was in the dock earlier in January when pigeons 
and monkeys intruded into the arena during the India Open. The massive facelift ensured that the 
marquee event's return to India after 17 years would be long remembered. An Se-Young will also go 
back with happy memories after reclaiming the women's singles crown from three-time titlist Akane 
Yamaguchi. The victory extended the 24-year-old reigning Olympic champion's stellar 2026, during 
which she has won an Uber Cup gold medal, and the individual and team trophies at the Badminton Asia 
Championships. 
For India, the competition was the 12th straight edition where it secured at least one medal, with Gayatri 
Gopichand and Treesa Jolly bagging a bronze in women's doubles. The performance is the latest in a 
series of good outcomes for Indian badminton after an ordinary 2025, where Satwiksairaj Rankireddy 
and Chirag Shetty's World Championships doubles bronze was the best result. This year, Lakshya Sen 
reached the All England Open final, and Ayush Shetty at the Badminton Asia Championships. P.V. 
Sindhu's victory at the Japan Open Super 750 last month was only her second Tour title in the last four 
years, and there were also triumphs for Satwiksairaj and Chirag at Singapore Open Super 750, and for 
Devika Sihag, Tanvi Sharma and Ashmita Chaliha at the Super 300 level. Yet, the feeling is 
unmistakable that India should have done better at a home World Championships, with Lakshya's 
second-round defeat to the unheralded American teenager Garret Tan the most disappointing. There 
is no questioning the 25-year-old's capability; he is a World Championships bronze medallist, a two-time 
All England finalist and finished an agonising fourth at the Paris 2024 Olympics. But no Indian men's 
singles player has won an elite BWF Super 1000-level title since К. Srikanth in 2017. A swift end to this 
drought is essential for the overall health of the sport. 
T