Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 227

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Agile 
A. natural 
2. Whopping 
B. guarantee  
3. Innate 
C. obedience 
4. Ensure 
D. nimble 
5. Compliance 
E. huge 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4-B 
5- C 

            Evident distress: On a war, Index of Eight Core Industries data, indicators 
Stress from the West Asia crisis has revealed economic pain 
s the resolution process of the West Asia crisis drags on, an increasing number of 
economic metrics are exposing key weaknesses in the Indian economy. Many of these 
existed before the crisis broke out in late February and are now becoming apparent as the 
economy faces stress. The latest data on the Index of Eight Core Industries show that 
these sectors cumulatively grew just 0.5% in May 2026, the second-lowest in 21 months. It 
would have been easy to pass this off as a war-related impact, but the data also show that the index 
grew by an almost equally anaemic 1.1% over the course of the entire financial year 2025-26. What 
remains a concern is that the domestic crude oil and natural gas sectors continued their multi-year 
streaks of contractions in May as well. By this time, the third month of the conflict, oil prices had settled 
somewhat lower than their April peaks. As a result, oil imports by oil marketing companies began rising 
once again to meet domestic demand. A strategic goal continues to be missed here. While imported oil 
can be used to meet demand, domestic production should nevertheless be ramped up to fill strategic 
reserves. This reserve oil, even of inferior quality, can be released in times of shortage. The same 
holds true for natural gas. With natural gas imports and domestic production contracting, it followed that 
the fertilizer sector would also contract. The good news, however, is that the contraction - of 0.9% in 
May 2026 - was much lower than it was even two months earlier. In any case, what impact the 'super 
El Niño' will have on fertilizer demand is still uncertain. 
Coal production, too, contracted by the most in nearly a year. As the summer continues to heat up, 
electricity generation will increasingly have to rely on variable renewable sources or costly imported 
coal. Notably, the core sectors are not the only ones revealing economic distress. The latest Goods and 
Services Tax (GST) revenue data too show that domestic economic activity seems to be slowing. 
Revenues from domestic transactions contracted 2.6% in May 2026. The government argues that this 
is because of a one-time windfall transfer it received in May last year. Even so, the average growth of 
domestic GST revenue over the last six months was just 3.1%, lower than in 2025-26 and the year 
before that. This is not a supply issue, since merchandise exports hit a record high in May 2026. It is a 
demand problem, as low real wage growth meets rising inflation to squeeze wallets. These are all 
distressing signals even as India enters a deficient monsoon. Trade deals are no substitute for hard-
hitting reforms. 
A


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Contracted 
A. pinch 
2. Deficient 
B. clear 
3. Squeeze 
C. decreased 
4. Evident 
D. feeble 
5. Anaemic 
E. insufficient 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B  
5- D 

            Razor's edge: On the progress of the southwest monsoon 
High heat and low rainfall is threatening agricultural produce 
The southwest monsoon deficit nationwide has increased from 35% to 43%; the winds' 
northward advance was stalled near Mumbai; and both the U.S. NOAA and the India 
Meteorological Department (IMD) expect a moderate-to-strong El Niño this year. The El Niño 
suppresses the vertical air movement needed for rainclouds to form while a warming Pacific 
is weakening the trade winds that bring moisture to the subcontinent. The Madden-Julian 
Oscillation is also in an unfavourable phase and the Indian Ocean Dipole currently cannot offer a buffer. 
Further, while northwest India has received 5% more rain than normal, central India and the northeast 
face deficits of 63% and 43%, respectively. But with two-thirds of the seasonal rainfall historically arriving 
in July and August, the monsoon may still recover and salvage the season. Together with reservoir 
storage at 30.4% of capacity, compared with 25.1% during previous El Niño years, there is no reason for 
alarm yet. However, the effects for agriculture are more concerning. The Agriculture Ministry has 
already prioritised 111 districts out of 315 vulnerable ones based on their irrigation coverage. Extreme 
heat has been reducing farm labour productivity. High heat and rain shortfall have sown anxiety over the 
cardamom harvest in Idukki, a fate that bodes ill for other plantation crops in the Western Ghats. 
Both the kharif sowing window for rice, pulses, and oilseeds and the availability of fertilizers could come 
under pressure, the latter due to Chinese export curbs and tensions in West Asia, heightening the risks 
of lower soil moisture and higher input stress. Retail food inflation was 4.2% in April; further deficits will 
especially threaten vegetables and pulses, complicating the monetary policy. The fundamental problem 
is the way India has built its rural economy around the assumption of reliable rainfall delivery. No 
adaptation strategy can indefinitely outpace unchecked warming, so limiting future warming should 
amount to reducing the extent of exposure. The ideal sustainable strategies are to switch from rain-
centric to water-centric organisation, reduce dependence on water-intensive crops, and improve 
resilience. Pathways for the first two have already been outlined. On the last, while the Agriculture 
Ministry's extant contingency plans reflect the need for adjustable sowing windows and alternative 
seed varieties, the principal variable remains implementation at scale. Second, the government should 
consider a new authority to coordinate inter-State water use and cropping changes based on extended 
El Niño forecasts, eliminating the cropping governance currently fragmented between the Agriculture 
and Jal Shakti Ministries, and the IMD. 
T