Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 136

Synthetic media: On labelling of AI-generated content 
The requirement of labelling AI-generated imagery is a good start 
rtificial Intelligence (AI)-generated deepfakes, or synthetically generated images and videos, 
have been proliferating on social media ever since generative AI made photorealistic 
content as easy as typing a description of a given scene. As this technology developed 
rapidly over 2024, concerns were raised over electoral integrity and disinformation 
amplified with the aid of such AI-generated content. While those concerns did not reach the 
peaks of the feared outcomes, AI "slop" has become pervasive, from low-budget advertisements to high-
budget political caricatures. In this context, the Union government's move to propose mandatory 
labelling of AI-generated content with an amendment to the IT Rules, 2021, advances the global 
conversation somewhat in navigating this phenomenon. It is unclear how big the problem of being 
unable to identify AI slop is for Internet users in India - also the world's second largest AI user base. 
Two key factors tilt the scales in favour of acting: as with pre-AI disinformation and misinformation, lies 
and misleading content may at any time explode into virality, granting them a disproportionate place in 
the democratic setup; and the technology to create photorealistic content that deceives many people is 
improving every week. Public personalities have frequently complained, sometimes in court, of the 
usurpation of their likenesses in the service of unscrupulous projects. 
Unlike mandatory smoking warnings at the cinema and on OTT streaming services, an intervention that 
had little industry buy-in before being imposed on entertainment producers and consumers alike with 
nothing to reliably show for impact, labelling has been offered up by large social media and AI firms from 
the very beginning of synthetic content's increasing accessibility. Meta, Inc. decided last year to label 
AI-generated content on Facebook, while the Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity 
(C2PA) has brought industry players together for working on "digital provenance" issues, borrowing a 
concept from the art appraisal world. Subordinate legislation may not have been the ideal instrument to 
effect this change - the IT Rules already regulate streaming services, social media content removals 
and the now-prohibited real money gaming industry, all without being tested in Parliament. At some 
point, these rules need to be explicitly considered by people's representatives. Technology policymakers 
have mused throughout the Internet-era that regulation lags behind innovation. The government must 
be willing to dynamically follow up this proposal with agile action both in terms of relaxing rules that 
have outlived their utility, and introducing new ones according to requirement. 
A


Tapping the shine: On the solar industry in India 
India must step in as a supplier of solar power to sustain its industry 
mong the successes that India can take reasonable credit for is cultivating a domestic solar 
power industry. Somewhere in 2017, the per unit cost of solar power fell below that of coal 
power, spurring new interest among businesses investing in ground-mounted solar 
projects. In 2024-25, the International Renewable Energy Agency reported that India 
generated 1,08,494 Gwh (gigawatt-hour) of solar energy, surpassing Japan's 96,459 Gwh, 
and making it the third largest producer of solar power behind only China and the United States. India's 
capacity to manufacture solar module panels rose from 2 GW (gigawatt) in 2014 to 100 GW in 2025, 
according to the Ministry of Renewable Energy. This is significant considering that India's domestically 
installed solar capacity is about 117 GW as of September. However, the actual manufacturing capacity is 
an optimistic projection and the effective production capacity currently is about 85 GW. 
India has stated that as part of its climate commitments, it will source half of its power requirements in 
2030 from non-fossil fuel sources. That is about 500 GW of which 250 GW-280 GW is expected to come 
from solar power. This means that India needs to add about 30 GW annually until 2030. However, India 
has effectively been able to add only about 17 GW-23 GW annually in the recent past. While in theory, 
internal production should be sufficient internally, modules made in India are anywhere from 1.5 to 2 
times more expensive than those from China, simply because of its much larger capacity, control of the 
necessary raw material and far superior production lines. India, in its best performance, managed about 
4 GW of export of solar modules to the U.S. in 2024 and that too, due to America's temporary 
restrictions. Compare that with China's annual export of around 236 GW in 2024. Therefore, the large 
manufacturing capacity that will come online in India in the next few years will likely struggle without 
new markets. In this context, India's overtures to be a 'solar supplier' to Africa, leveraging the flagship 
of the International Solar Alliance, is a good move. While India's PM Kusum scheme (solar power to rural 
India) and PM Surya Ghar scheme (rooftop solar in urban India) are yet to make substantial gains in 
terms of domestic adoption, they can serve as models to be pitched in Africa which, due to the lack of 
sufficient rural power, is able to tap only 4% of its arable land through irrigation, creating an opportunity 
for solar-powered India pumpsets. Though China still remains the dominant solar supplier in Africa too, 
India must be able to step in as a credible second player for a shot at the sustainability of its own 
industry. 
A