Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 127

An avoidable tragedy: On the TVK rally, the stampede in Karur 
Police must not allow roadshows in dense locations 
ffective crowd management at mass gatherings demands the cooperation of organisers and 
attendees. However, when popular film stars attempt to convert their frenzied fan base into 
political capital, crowd management and safety are often compromised. This was tragically 
demonstrated in Tamil Nadu's worst political rally disaster, that left 40 people, including 
children, dead, at Velusamypuram in Karur during actor-politician C. Joseph Vijay's campaign, 
on Saturday night (September 27, 2025). Since September 13, 2025, when the Kollywood 
megastar launched his "weekend-only" roadshows, promoting his fledgling Tamilaga Vettri 
Kazhagam (TVK) as an alternative to the ruling Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), restrictions have 
been breached and common sense sidelined. Mr. Vijay has resisted police restrictions, labelling them as 
a political move to stifle his growth. The TVK even approached the Madras High Court, which, concerned 
over the damage to public properties caused by his supporters, wanted the government to collect 
deposits from political parties as collateral. From the comfort of his campaign caravan, Mr. Vijay did little 
to prevent crowds along his route from joining in, paralyzing traffic and delaying his arrival at meeting 
venues by several hours. Youths climbed electricity poles, transformers and rooftops, and clung to trees, 
and families held up vulnerable children just to catch a glimpse of the actor. Yet, there was no effective 
corrective action either from the organisers or the police personnel. 
At Karur, the crowd, which was modest at noon, the scheduled time, swelled by the time he reached at 
7.20 p.m. as supporters gathered after work hours. When they surged forward to hear him speak, many 
fainted or were crushed due to compressive asphyxia. Police say there was a significant mismatch 
between the turnout projected by the TVK - 10,000 people - and the actual turnout - over 27,000. 
The government responded swiftly to the tragedy, arranging medical aid, overnight autopsies, and the 
prompt handing over of the bodies to grieving families. Chief Minister M.K. Stalin, who arrived in Karur 
past midnight, did the right thing by not politicising the tragedy and instead entrusting the probe to a 
commission of inquiry. The commission must look beyond the TVK's lapses and examine whether the 
police had acted independently, especially in denying the TVK its preferred venues to accommodate a 
larger gathering. Going forward, Mr. Vijay and the police must act to prevent such tragedies. The actor 
must make more frequent appearances to dispel the aura of mystique and abandon the practice of 
using roadshows as a show of strength. And the police must insist that all massive political meetings be 
held in open, spacious venues and not in dense locations.


Mixed signals: On India-U.S. talks 
India must face up to the possibility of failure in talks with the U.S. 
India-U.S. ties appear to be recovering some of their normal cadence, with trade negotiators 
resuming talks in Delhi and Washington, U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio meeting External 
Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar in New York, and a U.S. Congressional delegation visiting India, all 
within the past week. The U.S. Ambassador-Designate to India, Sergio Gor, has cleared most of 
the steps in his appointment, and awaits a vote on the U.S. Senate floor before arriving in Delhi. 
Officials are even outlooking the possibility of a meeting between Prime Minister Narendra Modi 
and U.S. President Donald Trump at the ASEAN Summit in Kuala Lumpur, and even the prospect 
of Mr. Trump travelling for the much-delayed Quad Summit in India. The Rubio-Jaishankar talks have 
been the mainstay of the relationship since the new administration came to power. Mr. Jaishankar is on 
This fifth officially-announced visit in nine months, beginning with a visit in December 2024, when he met 
the Trump transition team, until July 1, when he attended the Quad Foreign Minister's Meet in 
Washington, just before U.S. tariffs hit India and bilateral ties. Both men agreed on the importance of 
sustained talks. The U.S. State Department said issues including "trade, defence, energy, 
pharmaceuticals and critical minerals" were discussed. Trade talks being led by Commerce Minister 
Piyush Goyal also appear to be taking a positive turn, with hope that compromises would bring them 
closer on contentious issues such as market access on agriculture, dairy and GM foods, and 
smoothen the path of a free trade agreement with the promise of Indian investments and purchase of 
American military hardware and energy. 
However, Mr. Trump's recent actions and words have belied any sense of relief in the talks being 
restored. The decision to revoke India's sanctions waiver for its Chabahar port operations, followed by 
the Executive Order for a $100,000 visa fee for H-1B professionals were unexpected blows. His speech 
at the UN General Assembly made it clear that the U.S. could increase pressure on India to end its 
Russian oil purchases, and will continue to hold to its narrative on mediating the India-Pakistan conflict 
in May, which is frustrating for the Modi government as it has denied the U.S.'s role. Such moves may 
be negotiating tactics, to keep India on the back foot in trade negotiations, or an indication that the 
administration does not prioritise building a predictable and dependable partnership. Bilateral ties are a 
two-way street, and while New Delhi must be ready to deal patiently with more such bumps and hard 
knocks, it must also be prepared to walk away if or when that becomes necessary.