Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 188

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Whopping 
A. weakened 
2. Defanged 
B. violated 
3. Contravened 
C. balancing 
4. Conferred 
D. huge 
5. Countervailing 
E. granted 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- B 
4- E 
5- C 

            AI for all: On the India AI Impact Summit 2026 
The AI Impact Summit was a sign of things to come in India 
The attendance at the AI Impact Summit, in New Delhi, showed an extreme enthusiasm for 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies by digitally connected Indians. While statistics shared 
by AI firms have frequently cited India as the biggest user base outside the U.S., the crowds 
over the week were the biggest indicator of just how keen many Indians are to adopt this 
technology. At its core, the summit was a continuation of a series of annual multilateral 
discussions on AI, and 89 countries have signed a declaration laying out a voluntary set of commitments 
to share knowledge on AI democratisation. The summit's context comes with foreboding challenges 
for India: namely, deploying and diffusing a technology whose capital and infrastructure reside abroad, 
and finding a place in the global AI ecosystem that will place Indians well in the economic 
transformations that this technology's adoption promises. India's data centre capacity is growing 
healthily, but the AI moment calls for further momentum, a difficult ask when the costs of graphics 
processing units (GPUs) driving AI push up the cost of domestic deployment so much, not to mention the 
additional electrical capacity that must be built. A national strategy that relies overwhelmingly on 
becoming a hub for the deployment of models, with less emphasis on their training and finetuning, 
could pose risks; after all, with fewer labour costs, the advantage that India has will be smaller than in 
the ITeS era. 
On the international cooperation front, it is disappointing that India has so eagerly enabled the U.S.'s 
hands-off impulses for AI. This is a technology with enormous scope for economic and social 
disruption. Countries must use the annual AI forum to collectively build tools and safety standards that 
can exercise actual leverage over how LLMs diffuse throughout society. Leadership of the Global South 
entails empowering countries that are individually vulnerable to collateral damage in an era of great 
power rivalries. AI is increasingly defining that era more and more acutely. Consensus at all costs is not 
the appropriate approach. As a country of enthusiastic AI adopters, India has the leverage and capacity 
to articulate an optimistic but prudent way forward for AI governance, and the summit declaration 
showed no signs of this power. The summit's central pillar remains an important one: for AI to be a net 
good, its capabilities need to be democratised. As India closes its digital divide, there cannot be an 
inference gap. If the summit made anything clear, it was that India is as capable of organically 
contributing to worldwide growth as it has the capacity, should it choose, to be a force to shape its 
orderly growth. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Skirmishes 
A. shortfall 
2. Heal 
B. hurt 
3. Erupted 
C. clashes 
4. Bruised 
D. exploded 
5. Deficit 
E. recover 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- D 
4- B 
5- A 

            Tariffs in trouble: On the U.S. Supreme Court and Donald Trump 
The U.S. Supreme Court has done well to circumscribe Donald Trump's 
presidential powers 
In a major blow to a central pillar of U.S. President Donald Trump's foreign policy, the country's 
Supreme Court (SCOTUS) has ruled by a 6-3 margin that his use of the International Emergency 
Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) to impose tariffs on numerous countries is not in accordance with 
law and must be struck down. With Chief Justice John Roberts and two other conservative 
justices appointed by Mr. Trump siding with the three liberal justices on the subject, the Court ruled 
that Mr. Trump's assertion of "extraordinary power to unilaterally impose tariffs of unlimited amount, 
duration, and scope", is contravened by the absence of "clear congressional authorization" to exercise 
it. It also observed that the IEEPA contained no reference to tariffs or duties and that the executive had 
not identified any statute that used the word "regulate" to authorise taxation. Arguing that until now no 
President has read IEEPA to confer such power, the SCOTUS concluded that all the evidence available 
and its reading of the statutes implied that the Court believed that "IEEPA does not authorize the 
President to impose tariffs." Unsurprisingly, Mr. Trump reacted angrily on social media, posting that he 
would be raising his global tariff rate to 15%, after initially suggesting that it would be imposed at 10%, 
under the authority conferred to the White House for 150 days under Section 122 of the Trade Act of 
1974. Tariffs imposed under laws other than the IEEPA, including those on aluminium and steel under 
Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, are unaffected by this ruling although Mr. Trump would 
face challenges in bringing fresh tariff rounds under this umbrella. 
While multiple countries were slapped with tariffs earlier, including India at a whopping overall rate of 
50% owing to Washington's objections to New Delhi purchasing oil from Russia, the impact of the 
SCOTUS ruling will vary based on the specifics of trade agreements struck, if any. Indian negotiators 
seeking to conclude the terms of a free trade agreement would not be blamed for feeling like they were 
suspended in limbo after the ruling has changed the terms of debate on which sectors to open up to 
concessionary rates in bilateral trade, especially after the American side's punitive potential has now 
been defanged to an extent. At a broader level, the ruling is to be welcomed by anyone valuing robust 
democratic checks and balances. The two administrations of Mr. Trump have stretched, and in some 
cases exceeded, the scope of permissible policy actions under domestic and international law. Until this 
ruling by the court, there has been a deafening silence on containing such actions by institutions rooted 
in constitutional authority that are capable of imposing a countervailing force. 
I