Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 200

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Solitary 
A. supported 
2. Nurtured 
B. broadly 
3. Expansively 
C. deliberately 
4. Tinge 
D. single 
5. Consciously 
E. trace 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- B 
4- E 
5- C 

            Digital exile: On digital censorship 
The government could be creating a system of arbitrary censorship 
 decade-long trend in digital governance in India crescendoed last week when a slew of 
social media accounts operated by independent activists and journalists were blocked 
apparently for criticising the Union government and Prime Minister Narendra Modi over his 
government's West Asia policies and the LPG crisis. In seven years, from 2014 to 2021, the 
number of URLs, posts, and accounts blocked ballooned from 470 to 9,800; since then, 
there is evidence that entire accounts, especially if they were publishing politically unfavourable 
comments, were being blocked. There was a wave of censorship during the farmers' protest in 2020-
21; the government restored many accounts after international outcry but this also demonstrated that 
it was not beyond mass censorship. Similarly, the government used emergency powers under the IT 
Rules to block links to a BBC documentary in 2023, which also expanded the definition of what 
constituted a "threat to public order". But when Twitter (now X) challenged several blocking orders, 
between 2021 and 2022, in the Karnataka High Court, the High Court dismissed the plea and fined 
Twitter, further emboldening the state to censor accounts. 
In Shreya Singhal (2015), the Supreme Court of India upheld Section 69A of the IT Act 2000 precisely 
because of its procedural safeguards, including requiring reasoned orders and judicial review. In 
practice, however, the government has been diluting the safeguards through an expansive use of Rule 
16 of the 2009 Blocking Rules, which requires blocking proceedings to be confidential. When this 
stipulation is invoked to withhold blocking orders or their reasons from affected parties, it undermines 
their ability to challenge the action in court, eroding the very safeguards that justified the constitutionality 
of Section 69A. The 2009 Rules also require blocking orders to be reviewed by a committee composed 
under the IT Rules 2009, yet this is an entirely executive body and has never overturned a government 
blocking order. In effect, the government is openly and systematically bypassing the right to be heard 
and violating the doctrine of proportionality. [A1] Right to free speech while shielding [A]/ yet the 
government is [B]/ using it to override the constitutional [C]/ rule 16 is a procedural rule, [D]/ itself from 
judicial review [E]. A person's entire account being blocked amounts to a digital exile, removing the 
person from the public square, which is a hallmark of an authoritarian government rather than of a liberal 
democracy. The government's plan to decentralise blocking powers to multiple Ministries could 
effectively create a regime of arbitrary censorship, where any department can silence a critic without 
the specialised oversight, however flawed, of the IT Ministry. 
A


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Eroding 
A. protest 
2. Arbitrary 
B. diminishing 
3. Doctrine 
C. random 
4. Outcry 
D. imperfect 
5. Flawed 
E. principle 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- C 
3- E 
4- A 
5- D 

            Grim future: On the economy, discomfiting data 
India's economic fundamentals need a realistic reassessment 
The economy has recently been yielding some discomfiting data, even before the war in 
West Asia began. The most recent of these was the February 2026 data on the Index of Eight 
Core Industries. This release showed that growth in the overall Index had dropped to a three-
month low in February, half the rate of what it saw in January. This was not a case of a high 
base effect, either, with growth in February 2025 having been just 3.4%. The sector-wise data 
reveal further issues. The domestic crude oil industry has been contracting for six consecutive months. In 
fact, the sector has contracted in 20 out of the last 24 months. The natural gas sector, too, has 
contracted for the last 20 consecutive months. As context, from about the middle of last year, it had been 
increasingly clear that there would be some sort of escalation between the U.S. and Iran, even if the 
exact nature of the war now could not have been predicted then. It is no secret that India is highly 
dependent on energy imports, especially from the region that would have faced the brunt of any such 
escalation. As a matter of fact, a large part of the contraction in domestic production was likely 
because imports were coming cheap. Yet, as tensions increased, it might have been more prudent to 
have increased domestic oil and gas production over the last eight months so as to at least build 
reserves, if not to also temporarily reduce import dependence. Permanently reducing such dependence 
will take time, but a temporary domestic production push - as is belatedly underway - might have 
considerably alleviated the current supply crunch. Hindsight is 20-20, but that does not excuse a lack 
of foresight or an inability to learn. The Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana of 2016 should have triggered a 
concerted policy to secure LPG supplies and reserves. 
This poor core sector performance comes on top of the new series of GDP data showing that the Indian 
economy is actually smaller than previously thought. Further, between 2022-23 and 2025-26, the 
contributions to GDP of key engines such as private consumption, capital formation, exports and 
imports have all fallen. The share of 'change in stocks' has nearly doubled, however, meaning that there 
is production but not enough sales. Soon, that production too will reduce to fall in line with the subdued 
demand. All of this leads into the impact of the current crisis. With commercial fuel sources curtailed, oil 
prices at more than $100 a barrel, and global economic uncertainty at a high, economists and rating 
agencies are already downgrading India's growth outlook to about 6.5%. Perhaps, India's much-
vaunted macroeconomic fundamentals and resilience need a more realistic assessment. 
T