Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 145

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Mitigation 
A. practical 
2. Benchmarks 
B. violated 
3. Pragmatic 
C. standards 
4. Procurement 
D. reduction 
5. Breached 
E. acquisition 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Shutdown showdown: On the U.S. federal government shutdown 
Unbridled Trumpism has reduced any space for bipartisan cooperation 
The U.S. federal government shutdown has entered its 39th day, making it the longest such 
closure in American history, with a sharp impact on nearly 1.4 million federal employees who 
have been furloughed without pay, not to mention countless more affected by the suspension 
of a range of public services. The latest blow to the American public came on the heels of an 
announcement that major U.S. airlines would be reducing flights at more than 40 airports this 
week owing to a shortfall in air traffic controllers, leading to a heightened threat to air safety. The 
shutdown has also crippled normal functions in food and nutrition benefits including food stamps for the 
poor, early learning programmes for low-income families, services related to the Internal Revenue 
Service, national parks and social services. At the heart of the debate that led to the congressional 
stalemate was the expiration of subsidies for health insurance premiums purchased via the Affordable 
Care Act marketplace. At this point there would appear to be a glimmer of hope for resolution of the 
partisan logjam as the Senate is expected to vote on an amended budget bill following Republicans 
presenting a fresh proposal, which includes a short-term stopgap funding measure. Also bundled is a 
potential one year of fiscal support for food assistance, veterans affairs and military construction. 
However, the deeper malaise of bitter polarization in the political discourse persists, even if painful 
shutdowns come and go. Mr. Trump certainly bettered his first term election victory when he galloped 
into the White House in 2024. Despite the "red shift" that handed him a win in every swing State last 
year, liberals and progressives have certainly not thrown in the towel; rather, they have regrouped to 
make a strong showing in the recent mayoral, gubernatorial and other State-level elections. At stake are 
the most poignant of policy issues impacting ordinary Americans, including jobs, tariffs and inflation, but 
also pressing questions on immigration, health care and education. While it is only to be expected that 
American society, known for fiercely guarding the rights guaranteed in the Constitution's First 
Amendment, will regularly and vociferously express divergent views on these critical subjects, the 
substantive core of good governance will be lost to many unless the spirit of bipartisanship flickers 
once again amidst the shambles of congressional dysfunction. In this context the debilitation wreaked 
by the ongoing shutdown only shows that there is a need for a new normal in U.S. politics, a humane, 
pragmatic middle path between unbridled Trumpism and the old world of progressive America. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Indomitable 
A. sacred 
2. Transition 
B. fearless 
3. Hallowed 
C. change 
4. Doughty 
D. core 
5. Nucleus 
E. unconquerable 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Urgent update: On the India's Consumer Price Index 
India needs to revise its Consumer Price Index urgently 
The retail inflation data for October once again underscore the fact that the update of the 
Consumer Price Index (CPI) cannot happen fast enough. The data show that the rate of 
overall inflation fell to just 0.25%, the lowest it has been since at least January 2012. On the 
face of it, this would be cause for celebration, but a deeper look reveals this drastic fall to be a 
statistical anomaly rather than an actual fall in price levels. The food and beverages category 
saw prices falling 3.7% in October, the largest in the history of the CPI's current series. However, the 
main reason for this contraction was not so much that food prices have fallen, but because food 
inflation in October last year was a blistering 9.7%. This high base ensured that food inflation in 
October 2025 was negative, even though vegetable prices in markets have been on the rise recently. 
With the food and beverages category enjoying a weightage of nearly 46% in the overall CPI basket, this 
statistical anomaly in food inflation was responsible for pulling the entire index down. Indeed, inflation in 
nearly every other major sub-group - fuel and light, housing, tobacco, and the miscellaneous category 
- was higher this October than last. The impact of the GST rate cuts has, so far, been seen only in the 
clothing and footwear category - the only one apart from food to see inflation lower than last year. All of 
this shows just how skewed the inflation measure is. Not only is it outdated, with the base year set as 
2012, but the weightages are no longer accurate and more often obscure rather than clarify. The 
disconnect between the CPI and reality can perhaps best be shown by the fact that people the Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) had surveyed in September had said that their perceived inflation rate was 7.4% - 
a far cry from what the CPI reported. 
The urgency behind the update is not just because of the vast gap between measured and perceived 
inflation. It is also because the RBI's Monetary Policy Committee uses the CPI as its benchmark when 
deciding what to do with interest rates. Its next meeting is in December and it will have to decide whether 
to keep rates unchanged or to cut them. It will have to contend with growth data clouded by the 
temporary impact of the GST rate cut-related demand boost. Having to also parse through inflation data 
beset by statistical anomalies will only make accurate policymaking that much harder. The Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation has said that the new series of the CPI will be ready by the 
first quarter of the next financial year. The sooner it happens, the better. 
T