Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 126

Hot air: On U.S. President Donald Trump's rant against climate change science 
Donald Trump's rant against climate change science is helping no one 
resident Donald Trump delivered to the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) an 
address that was allergic to facts. Describing climate change as the "greatest con job 
perpetrated on the world", he said that Europe's decades-long trimming of its carbon footprint 
had come at the expense of shuttered factories and job losses. In his Luddite conception of 
the workings of climate change, scientists in the early half of the 20th century had said that 
global cooling "would kill the world" and when that did not happen they said global warming 
would. And because the world did not end, he reckons, dishonest scientists now refer to it as 
'climate change' to sound correct irrespective of the outcome. Never mind the fact that the average 
global temperature dip of 0.1°C (from 1945-70) was attributed to an increase in sulphur emissions from 
burning coal. Never mind that there is an Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change that has, since the 
1990s, provided a forum for thousands of scientists to tease apart the effects of natural variations in 
climate from that due to human-caused ones. Never mind that climate change - the term - means 
precisely that global warming does not mean hotter weather everywhere but a larger disruption in the 
circulation of ocean currents and, therefore, increasingly erratic weather. 
Mr. Trump's chagrin is less about the subtleties of climate than it is about what it means to the fossil fuel 
industry. To him, the increasing adoption of solar and wind energy was evidence of countries being on 
the "brink of destruction" because of pursuing a "green agenda". That the President of a country, which 
once led the science of parsing the subtleties of anthropogenic warming, would, one day, stand on one 
of the world's most prestigious podiums to undermine it, shows that deference to scientific wisdom is a 
thing of the past. There are legitimate criticisms of the multi-lateral process in place to guide climate 
action, determining justice and equity in remedial action and whether the impact of the climate crisis is 
undermined, even by its adherents, by making it subservient to the zero-sum chicanery of trade 
protectionism. The perspective of the leader of the world's largest economy on these would have been 
valuable. The complexity of weather changes means that it is reasonable to be perplexed about the 
mechanics of climate change. Painting it as a harbinger of a Mayan apocalypse has not helped either. 
Yet, it is clear that due to a slow accretion of hard evidence, falsifiable conjecture and measured 
prognosis, the scientific process is working the way it should. Despite its inefficiencies, the climate 
confabulation process has positioned the world towards a post-fossil-fuel future. No rant can change 
that.


Upgrading shipyards: On strengthening India's shipbuilding infrastructure 
Incentives for shipbuilding must include long term offtake possibilities 
The recently announced package of ₹69,725 crore, to revitalise India's shipbuilding and 
maritime ecosystem, is to replace the package of 2015, which is set to expire in March 2026. 
In the last 10 years, while lucrative defence orders had kept some shipyards busy, only half-
a-dozen small merchant ships or so were built in all of India. India's capacity to build large 
merchant ships remains minuscule, which the package hopes to expand to 4.5 million gross 
tonnage. The plan is to upgrade shipyards for cutting-edge technology and management 
principles, promote new yards in clusters housing factories for shipbuilding ancillaries, and 
support shipowners for financing newbuilds. But key questions remain over how this package will 
succeed as the earlier one was largely a failure. 
Globally, shipbuilding has been honed into a fine art. In Korean, Japanese or even Chinese yards, 
component blocks of large merchant ships are prefabricated outside the actual dry dock and moved to 
the dry dock, using cranes of say 1,000 tonnes, where they are welded together. The yards are long 
enough to be assembly lines. In the past, the metric was keel-laying-to-waterborne. Today that takes just 
three to four months. It takes just about a year from the process of first steel to sea trials for a large 
merchant ship. Barring an exception or two, Indian yards are neither long enough nor have the crane 
capacity and space and capability to do the prefabs. Ancillaries are another bottleneck. A turnaround 
of about two to three years is the norm in India - or two more years of capital sunk without returns. This 
is a key reason for Indian shipowners not ordering new shipbuilds even if the subsidies in previous policy 
addressed the issue of high capex. Shipyard upgrading should address this issue. China, for instance, 
has thought through shipbuilding in full and set up institutions to train manpower. At this point, India will 
need to start small, such as ships of 500 gross tonnage and above. The bottleneck is that while terming 
ship newbuilds as infrastructure has brought down the cost of finance through lower interest rates and 
extended repayment schedules, this applies only to large vessels. Incentives to promote shipbuilding 
will need to include long-term offtake possibilities. Indian shipowners do not see long-term demand 
visibility for them to invest in newbuilds in Indian yards with cost overruns from delays. For instance, 
India's green fuel production policy has seen projects to make and export green fuels through Kakinada 
and Kochi but without leveraging them to build green ships and do the offtake as well. Long-term 
shipping contracts and time charters, for imported coal from State-owned power utilities and imported 
crude from oil companies, will spur shipbuilding.