Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 171

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Halting 
A. unavoidable 
2. Engendered 
B. approaching 
3. Impending 
C. sudden drop 
4. Plunge 
D. generated 
5. Inevitable 
E. stopping 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- B 
4- C 
5- A 

            Troubling repeat: On ISRO's failed PSLV-C62 mission 
ISRO must begin rebuilding quality assurance protocols 
In January 12, as the PSLV-C62 mission rose from Sriharikota into the morning sky and its 
third stage kicked on, the live telecast abruptly stopped showing the rocket's 
performance and trajectory. As it became evident that its third stage had suffered an 
anomaly, putting paid to the C62 mission in a manner similar to the PSLV-C61 mission in 
May 2025, the change in the telecast became more familiar. For decades, the PSLV has 
been the 'workhorse' of India's space ambitions. Together with the rocket's technology being mature, the 
implication is that the mistakes that sank two PSLV launches could be on the quality assurance side. At 
least, these are not likely to be isolated anomalies. The C61 mission failed after its third stage lost 
chamber pressure, but rather than publicly reveal the diagnosed root cause, the decision was to leave 
the Failure Analysis Committee (FAC) report with the Prime Minister's Office. ISRO provided assurances 
of "structural reinforcements" and cleared the PSLV for its next flight. The symptom of the C62 failure, a 
"roll rate disturbance", parallels the events preceding the C61 failure. The financial consequences are 
poor: under the aegis of NewSpace India Limited, ISRO has been positioning the PSLV as a commercial 
product in a competitive global launch market. Now, international insurers operating in this market will 
reassess the PSLV's risk profile and the insurance premiums could skyrocket, rendering the vehicle 
less affordable - a strategic embarrassment for a country aspiring to be a net provider in space. 
The tenure of ISRO Chairman V. Narayanan has been characterised by a continued shift away from 
ISRO's traditional culture of scientific openness toward a more guarded, bureaucratic posture. While the 
pressure to maintain a high launch cadence is understandable, his decision to move the C62 mission 
to the pad while the autopsy of its predecessor remains classified should raise tough questions about 
the organisation's priorities. That the C62 mission also carried the EOS-N1 satellite, built by the DRDO 
and with unspecified strategic applications, could help explain a 'rush' if there was one. Fortunately for 
Mr. Narayanan, ISRO has also demonstrated the increasing reliability of its LVM-3 rocket in his time, 
most recently with the M6 mission in December 2025. But right now, ISRO's and his best path to 
restoring confidence, and begin the painful work of rebuilding quality assurance protocols, is for the 
Department of Space to release the FAC report for the C61 mission. The tax-paying public and 
commercial stakeholders deserve to know what went wrong in 2025, whether it recurred in 2026, and 
why the third stage was affected again. 
O


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Cadence 
A. suddenly 
2. Reassess 
B. rhythm 
3. Isolated 
C. reappeared 
4. Abruptly 
D. standalone 
5. recurred 
E. reconsider 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- D 
4- A 
5- C 

            More for later: German Chancellor Friedrich Merz's India visit 
Chancellor Merz's visit signals a wider engagement with the EU 
mid tensions on several other foreign policy fronts, German Chancellor Friedrich Merz was 
the first of several high-level visitors to Delhi to strengthen India-Europe ties. Preparations 
are on for the EU-India Summit later this month, when the Presidents of the European 
Commission and Council will attend the Republic Day parade; plans for French President 
Emmanuel Macron's visit - he will attend the AI summit in February - are also being [A1] 
finalised. The meet between Chancellor Merz and Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Ahmedabad was 
about more than bilateral relations. It was about reaffirming elements of talks with the EU to conclude a 
long-awaited trade agreement, as Germany is its biggest economy, as well as exchanging notes on 
geopolitical turmoil, especially the U.S.'s actions. The leaders also attended a business council meeting, 
where they pitched more investments. With trade passing $50 billion in 2024-25, Germany remains 
India's largest trading partner in Europe. While the talks are understood to have been substantive, the 
outcomes were in essence a series of "Joint Declarations of Interest (JDI)" and MoUs. Among the JDIs 
signed, several deal with cooperation on strategic issues, including a Defence Industrial Cooperation 
Roadmap to promote collaborations and technology partnerships in defence equipment. This is seen as 
a precursor to the enabling agreements for defence purchases that India and Germany have been 
discussing but have yet to sign on to. 
Where India and Germany have a less common view is on the Ukraine war, and the European 
contention that India must curtail its relationship with Russia. Chancellor Merz may have overstepped 
as he sought to portray India's German defence relationship as a means to reduce its "dependence" on 
Russian hardware. The statement was [A2] refuted by Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri later. While 
Germany and the EU are also hoping for a closer dialogue with India on the Indo-Pacific, Germany's 
bilateral trade with China, [A3] pegged at $287 billion in 2024-25, has not diversified and China is 
Germany's largest trading partner. It is therefore doubly significant that Chancellor Merz made India his 
first stop in Asia. The two sides also have differences over the upbringing of five-year-old Ariha Shah, 
who was taken away by German child services in 2021 over allegations that her Indian parents abused 
her. Despite India's appeals, Ms. Shah continues to live in German foster care, with only periodic 
consular and parental visits, and little sustained exposure to Indian culture or languages. The case of an 
individual may seem less important, but should be resolved without further delay. 
A