Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 231

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Corrosive 
A. undermine 
2. Scrutinize 
B. strangely 
3. Erode 
C. destructive 
4. Malfeasance 
D. investigate 
5. Eerily 
E. wrongdoing 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- B 

            Unwelcome surge: On the buoyancy in GST collections 
The buoyancy in GST collections is spurred by imported inflation 
India's June GST collections rose 13.9% year-on-year to ₹1.95 lakh crore, driven largely by import 
IGST, which surged 34.6% compared with June 2025, up from 17.2% growth in May. Domestic 
GST collections grew by a more modest 6.5%, suggesting that the sharp increase in overall 
collections owes less to a broad-based improvement in domestic value addition. Some economists 
have argued that this reflects stronger imports of capital goods and industrial inputs. However, May 
petroleum products' trade data and Q1 FY27 data on the performance of the eight core industries, point 
to a rather different explanation. June GST collections reflect economic activity during May. While crude 
and petroleum products constituted a 54% rise this May (YoY) in merchandise imports by value, the 
other chunk was gold, which constituted another 34% rise. The surge in gold price, by nearly 60% 
between last May and this May, suggests hedging during difficult times, rather than broad-based 
economic activity. To stem gold imports, the government hiked its import duty from 6% to 15% on May 
13, which likely added to the May import GST kitty. This period also coincided with the rupee 
depreciating by almost 6% against the U.S. dollar since late February. This coupled with a spike in 
freight charges, and a 14.5% rise on non-oil imports in May at elevated global prices mechanically 
raised the June tax base. This suggests that much of the import GST rise is driven by imported inflation 
and currency depreciation rather than domestic production growth, indicating an unwelcome increase 
due to higher prices. 
Read alongside the performance of India's eight core industries, which expanded by only about 2.8% in 
Q1 FY27 compared with around 6% in the corresponding period last year, the domestic economy 
appears more subdued. Growth has been expectedly weak in crude oil, natural gas, refinery products, 
fertilizers and electricity. The latest HSBC Manufacturing PMI reading of 54.2 likewise points to steady 
but moderating factory activity, marking the second-lowest expansion in 13 months. These figures come 
as India marks nine years of GST as a unified destination-based indirect tax. The government can point 
to the expansion of the tax base from about 66 lakh taxpayers in 2017 to over 1.65 crore today, reflecting 
better compliance, greater formalisation, and faster refunds, though input tax credit, litigation and 
federal balance in revenue sharing issues remain unresolved. GST has strengthened India's indirect tax 
architecture. Yet, the June numbers are a reminder that a growing share of the recent buoyancy 
appears to have been underwritten by imported inflation and a depreciating rupee rather than stronger 
domestic value addition. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Chunk 
A. protecting 
2. Elevated 
B. moderate 
3. Constituted 
C. portion 
4. Hedging 
D. formed 
5. Modest 
E. raised 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- D 
4- A 
5- B 

            Counting cancer: On making cancer a notifiable disease in India 
Making cancer a notifiable disease at the national level is the way forward 
hat's good for the goose is surely good for the geese. What the States will benefit 
from, the country could too. In India, cancer is not a notifiable disease at the national 
level, keeping with the Health Ministry's position that such notification is only for 
communicable diseases. Population-based cancer registries and hospital-based 
cancer registries are currently the only national tool at the disposal of the Centre to 
count cancer cases. Unfortunately, these registries cover about 10%-16 % of the population, and have 
an urban, government health care set-up skew. However, several States have taken the lead on this 
front, making cancer a notifiable disease within their boundaries. Telangana is the latest to join the list of 
States that have made cancer a notifiable disease, bringing the total number of States doing so to 17. 
With the Global Cancer Observatory (affiliated to the World Health Organization) projecting an estimated 
increase of 1.05 million cases between 2022 (1.41 million) and 2045 (2.46 million), the rise is expected to 
be a staggering over 74%. Given these projections, thanks to an increasing life span and ageing 
demographics, changes in lifestyle and diet, it becomes all the more important to be armed with data and 
get ready for vanguard action from a public health point of view. While State action can, to an extent, 
solve the data question, any benefit thus derived from notifying health authorities of every single case of 
cancer, it cannot become a rubric by which the nation can contour its cancer control programme. Apart 
from existing registries covering mostly urban and semi-urban posts, care in India is also delivered in 
good measure through the private sector and that data set is not uniformly captured. The Indian 
government must pay heed to its own counsel, the Indian Council of Medical Research, National Centre 
for Disease Informatics and Research (now ICMR-NINE) had recommended that cancer be made a 
notifiable disease years ago. It is a fact that establishing cancer as a notifiable disease will mean a 
sudden increase in the number of cases being recorded, but it must not be considered a liability. 
Instead, it is merely part of the process of crafting a studied, and evidence-based response - health 
care and information, education, and communication (IEC) - to cancer at the country level. While bold 
advances in research and treatment methodologies have retrieved cancer from the fear and the utter 
helplessness surrounding it, the heart of the issue remains the lack of data. Taking lessons from the 
States, the Centre must recalibrate and make cancer a notifiable disease in India. 
W