Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 125

Penalty in proportion: On growing use of criminal defamation proceedings 
Criminal defamation is incompatible with democratic debate 
hen the Supreme Court of India upheld the validity of criminal defamation in 
Subramanian Swamy (2016), reasoning that reputation is part of the right to life, it 
may not have anticipated the difficulties of this position. On September 22, 2025, 
during criminal defamation proceedings against the Foundation for Independent 
Journalism, Justice M.M. Sundresh of the Court voiced his unease at the growing use 
of criminal defamation proceedings by private individuals and political actors as an 
insurance against criticism and as a means of retribution. His observation echoes a 
broader judicial anxiety expressed in recent proceedings against Rahul Gandhi, Shashi Tharoor and 
other public figures: that the law is being misused. Criminal defamation proposes imprisonment for 
speech that injures reputation, a remedy disproportionate to the harm caused. Unlike physical harm, 
reputational injury can be addressed adequately by monetary damages or injunctions. While protecting 
dignity may justify strong safeguards, protecting reputation seldom warrants criminal punishment. Since 
2016, criminal defamation has become a tool of intimidation. Editors of The Hindu faced such cases 
under the Jayalalithaa government, and Mr. Gandhi over remarks about political leaders, with trial courts 
issuing summons that required the Court's intervention. The tendency of the lower judiciary to issue 
summons without weighing the threshold of defamatory speech has aggravated the problem. 
The law has also become an instrument of propaganda: criminal complainants have weaponised 
statements taken out of context or distorted in circulation, which the law has compounded by attaching 
the threat of jail time to contested interpretations. In this way, criminal defamation has fostered 
opportunistic litigation. For example, Subramanian Swamy versus Sonia Gandhi and Mr. Gandhi (2012-
14) entangled rivals in a punishing process rather than seeking timely resolution, while suits filed by 
Nitin Gadkari and Arun Jaitley against Arvind Kejriwal and AAP leaders kept the Delhi government from 
performing its duties. For journalists in towns, criminal defamation complaints from local politicians or 
business interests create the risk of arrest and onerous travel to distant courts, fostering self-censorship. 
Instead, those genuinely aggrieved can approach civil courts for damages, injunctions or retractions, 
which address the harm of reputational injury and strike a balance between free expression and 
protecting reputation. Importantly, civil proceedings also reduce the scope for misuse by the powerful to 
silence criticism. Many countries, including the U.K., have abolished criminal defamation because such 
laws are incompatible with democratic debate. It is time for India to follow suit.


Consumption conundrum: On the Indian economy's predicament 
Household spending can boost the economy, but it needs a jumpstart 
The government's push this year to spur consumption in the economy is a much-needed 
policy re-prioritization at a time when several other engines of growth are either flagging or 
plateauing. The economy is a composite of household consumption, private investment, 
government expenditure and net exports. Of these, only government expenditure has 
witnessed robust growth over the past few years, thanks to the Modi government's 
infrastructure push. It has also made available interest-free loans to States to do the same. 
However, as Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman has indicated in the last two Union 
Budgets, even though the Centre will increase its capital expenditure, it will not be at the blistering rate 
of 30%-35% that the early post-COVID-19 pandemic years saw. The government has other 
developmental and defence priorities that need funds too. It is time for the private sector to step up its 
investments. Private investment has grown, but not nearly at the rate needed to move India from 6%-
6.5% growth to the more than 8% needed to meet the targets. Given that industrial capacity utilization 
has not crossed 80% since March 2011, the only way to induce more private investment is to increase 
demand substantially. Net exports, especially merchandise, are struggling due to the global uncertainty 
around trade, and the U.S.'s 50% tariffs imposed on Indian imports. That is, demand from abroad is 
petering out, which leaves household consumption to do the heavy lifting. 
There are two ways to encourage people to spend - increasing their incomes and lowering prices. The 
GST rate reforms, with effect from September 22, are a significant step in executing the latter. 
According to a study published by FICCI, more than three-fourths of rural monthly expenditure will attract 
either nil or 5% GST rates. This was previously 56%. For urban Indians, this proportion has been 
increased from half to two-thirds. On the income side, the government tried to put more money in 
people's pockets by reducing income-tax rates in Budget 2025. This was a welcome and necessary step, 
although it is not enough to encourage a change in spending behaviour. People are more likely to save 
than spend that extra amount. The other way disposable income will rise substantially is if companies 
decide to increase wages. However, apart from a few niche sectors, India has an oversupply of labour, 
and wages will simply not grow fast enough. There is also a skill deficit that needs to be urgently 
addressed. This is the unfortunate predicament that the Indian economy finds itself in: consumption is 
the only driver of growth that is largely immune to global factors. But it also has high inertia, needing 
relatively more fiscal investment before it can get a jump-start.