Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 138

Sanctioning Russia: On the Trump administration's fresh sanctions on Russia 
Trump is seeking to bring Putin to talks by breaking his strategic will 
The Trump administration has imposed fresh sanctions on Russia as punitive measures 
relating to Moscow's refusal to strike a ceasefire agreement to bring the war in Ukraine to a 
halt, with Washington targeting Russian oil giants Rosneft and Lukoil. Russia's use of the oil 
trade to finance war has been a bone of contention for NATO members since the early days of 
Russia's incursion into and attacks on Ukraine, an indirect dimension of the conflict that has 
pulled Asian powers India and China into the fray. Over the summer, Mr. Trump sought to up the ante in 
this regard by slapping India with an additional 25% tariff for importing Russian oil, over and above the 
basic 25% rate imposed on other countries as well, even though China, as a top importer of Russian 
seaborne crude, was spared this levy. Now, the latest round of sanctions appeared to have penalized 
both trading partners of Moscow significantly, with reports suggesting that at least four major state-
owned Chinese oil companies have suspended purchases from Russia and that at least one private and 
three state-owned Indian refinery companies are planning for "recalibration of Russian oil imports" 
including the possibility of a "massive cut" over time. 
At the heart of the White House move is the seething frustration of Mr. Trump over failed attempts to not 
only bring Russian President Vladimir Putin to the negotiating table - a feat achieved in Alaska in 
August and a second summit agreed in Budapest before it was postponed following the collapse of 
ceasefire talks - but also to nudge the Kremlin towards at least a short-term arrangement that might 
lead to a cessation of hostilities as a precursor to a broader treaty on territorial and institutional 
agreements. It is possible that the latest sanctions may lead to a genuine tightening of options for Mr. 
Putin on ending the war, especially as Washington will now be joining the European Union that has 
adopted its 19th sanctions package against Moscow, specifically focusing on technology supply chains, 
energy revenues, and financial networks. Nevertheless, it may be premature to applaud their potential 
impact on the Kremlin's strategic calculus. Ultimately, whether sanctions have teeth or not depends on 
the consistency of their enforcement, including shutting down the inevitable loopholes and workarounds 
that Moscow will seek to exploit to continue selling oil abroad, possibly at even sharper discounts. Mr. 
Trump may find that he has travelled full circle to arrive at the same sticky negotiating points between 
Moscow and Kiev that his predecessor faced - an early end to ground hostilities, control of Donbas, and 
the permissible extent of NATO influence in the region. Only if sanctions can break Russian strategic will 
on at least one of these points will the prospects for peace brighten considerably. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in 
Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Align 
A. reduce 
2. Endeavour 
B. clear 
3. Explicit 
C. effort 
4. Trim 
D. adjust 
5. Prominent 
E. eminent 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- B 
4- A 
5- E 
New chapter: on Turkiye and the Kurdistan Workers Party's announcement 
Turkiye must ease restrictions in the Kurdish region and release Öcalan 

            he Kurdistan Workers Party's (PKK) announcementthat it would withdraw all its fighters from 
Turkiye to northern Iraq marksa significant step in the peace process between Kurdish 
militants and the Turkish state. When the group's imprisoned leader, Abdullah Öcalan, called 
on the PKK to disarm and dissolve in February, many doubted whether the outfit would honour 
This appeal. It has been waging an insurgency for decades. But in March, its executive 
committee declared that "none of our forces will take armed action unless attacked". On May 
12, the group announced its full dissolution, and that its demands could be met through 
"democratic politics". Its fighters even held a symbolic weapons destruction ceremony. The group's 
demands have changed over the years. An initial demandfor an independent state for the Kurds 
waslater moderated to greater rights and limited autonomy for the Kurdish region. But decades of 
violence, which claimed some 50,000 lives, seemto have blunted the PKK's appetite for insurgency. 
Mr. Öcalan has been in jail since his capture in February 1999, while most of the group's senior 
commanders operate from northern Iraq, which is periodically bombed by Turkiye. Political 
groupslinked to the PKK havefaced sustained crackdowns inside Turkiye. 
Turkiye's President Erdoğan has called the PKK's decision to disarm "an irreversible turning point". He 
has also appointed a 51-member cross-party parliamentary commission to chart the path forward. But 
the rebels are pressing for faster and firmer legislative action that would allow them to join "democratic 
politics". Turkiye's southeastern Kurdish regions have endured decades of military operations, 
displacement and economic stagnation. They deserve peace. The PKK is still a banned, terrorist 
organisation in Turkiye and allied countries. For the peace process to hold, Turkiye needs a new legal 
framework, governing amnesty, political participation, and the protection of Kurdish cultural and linguistic 
rights as the militants transition into political life. Without clear laws, disarmed PKK fighters could remain 
stranded in the mountains of northern Iraq, while their supporters at home would feel betrayed. 
Peaceful resolutionof the Kurdish question couldoffer a template for addressing Kurdish grievances 
across the region - Iraq, Syria and Iran. Conversely, failure could reigniteTurkiye's conflict and 
embolden hardliners elsewhere who insist that states understand only force. Mr. Erdoğan should match 
the PKK's decision with irreversible measures, including releasing Mr. Öcalan, easing restrictions in the 
Kurdish region and enacting laws that end the conflict and open a new chapter for Turkiye.