Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 261

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Offensive 
A. avenged 
2. Precipice 
B. guard 
3. Retaliated 
C. attack 
4. Escort 
D. implemented 
5. Enforced 
E. cliff 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Growth spurt: On data by Federation of Automobile Dealers' Associations 
Alternative powertrains are now mainstream in automobiles 
ccording to data released by the Federation of Automobile Dealers' Associations (FADA), 
total vehicle registrations in August have increased 17.5% year on year, recording the all-
time highest volume for the month, and with alternative powertrains, i.e., CNG, electric, and 
hybrids, leading passenger vehicle sales for the first time. But upon a closer look, some 
confounding factors emerge that also warrant caution about the figures. First, July 2026 
itself was a strong month, with the August numbers 6.4% lower, possibly due to the monsoon. Second, 
the number of vehicles retailed in rural areas grew 19.7% year on year over 15.1% in urban areas; 
passenger vehicles sales likewise increased 24.9% in rural areas versus 10.9% in urban areas. This 
could be due to rising disposable incomes and consistent state capital expenditure on semi-urban 
infrastructure. However, tractor sales have in the past indicated monsoon-related rural stress, and while 
their sales are virtually unchanged year on year, they declined 25% month on month. Together with 
two-wheelers and passenger vehicles selling well, the trend suggests that non-farm rural incomes and 
mobility could be strengthening more than capital spending linked to agriculture. Third, last year, the 
GST Council reduced taxes on small cars, motorcycles (up to 350 cc), three-wheelers, buses, and goods 
vehicles, so August 2025 sales growth dropped as buyers waited for the new rates from September. 
Fourth, while CNG, hybrid, and electric powertrains beat petrol/ethanol vehicle sales by 1.1 percentage 
points, most hybrid vehicles still burn petrol while CNG itself is a fossil fuel. So the lead taken by 
alternative powertrains is not synonymous with a lead of non-fossil-fuel vehicles. 
That said, petrol vehicles falling behind is still notable; the data also show that between August 2024 
and August 2026, CNG and electric power-trains contributed most of the surge, implying that Indians are 
switching to alternatives that are cheaper to run, in light of the West Asia conflict and, to a lesser degree, 
concerns over ethanol blending. Next, the move away from petrol is uneven: three-wheelers are 
predominantly electric while two-wheelers catch up, and passenger cars' powertrains continue to 
diversify. And electrification continues to reflect rising consumer demand as much as industrial policy. 
Finally, FADA also reported that, despite record sales, dealers are holding 38-40 days of inventory 
against the recommended 21. So while the petrol era is far from over, the Indian automotive industry has 
commenced the mass-market integration of alternative powertrains. But that said, only if September-
November preserves the gains in alternative powertrains after the base effect disappears, and dealer 
inventories return to normal levels, can August 2026 be considered a historic moment. 
A


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Notable 
A. initiated 
2. Commenced 
B. puzzling 
3. Spurt 
C. appear 
4. Confounding 
D. remarkable 
5. Emerge 
E. surge 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            More heft: On India and the 18th BRICS Summit 
The BRICS Summit allows India to advance its global ambitions 
orging a joint statement at a major multilateral conference, in the midst of global conflicts 
where members are involved is never easy - for India, hosting the BRICS Summit in Delhi is 
the second time in recent years, since the G-20 Summit in 2023, that it has had to shoulder 
such a responsibility. That, however, is not the only reason India's BRICS presidency comes at 
a difficult time. The past few occasions India has hosted the coalition of emerging economies 
in 2012, 2016 and virtually in 2021 - it was a smaller grouping of just five major powers, where managing 
consensus was easier. Since the expansion in 2024 - adding Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and 
the UAE - and Indonesia's induction in 2025, BRICS' identity has evolved, but a common focus remains 
elusive. In addition, global conflicts involving BRICS members have grown. The war involving Iran has 
heightened this impact, as Iran, a victim of the U.S.-Israel strikes, as well as the UAE that was attacked 
by Iran in retaliation, are members that have been unwilling to agree to a common narrative on the 
problem. India's position on Israel also came into conflict with other members earlier this year, as the 
grouping has traditionally taken a much more critical line on Israel's actions. The largest share of New 
Delhi's problems as host comes however from the United States, where President Donald Trump has 
accused it of plotting to overthrow the U.S. dollar's domination of the global economy, and has been 
threatening tariffs on all members for planning to increase intra-BRICS payments and trade. As the 
Modi government seeks to restore ties with the Trump administration, on trade and its Indo-Pacific 
strategy, hosting BRICS also risks invoking America's ire, however irrational. 
As a result, a success in reconciling all these different strands at this time would indeed be a shot 
across the bow for the grouping and a big win for Indian diplomacy. Since it was first conceptualised 25 
years ago, and a summit convened in 2009, the BRICS countries have risen in global stature and 
economic heft, benefitting intra-BRICS trade. Today, BRICS accounts for half the world's population, 
two fifths of the global economy and a fourth of global trade; it also includes many of the world's top 
energy producers and biggest consumers. While the grouping prefers not to be called anti-western it is 
certainly a powerful counter to the G-7, and western-led thinking. Being part of BRICS gives India more 
heft in advancing its ambitions on the global high table, and its presidency has ensured it prominence 
on the world stage, as leaders and representatives of 11 BRICS countries including Xi Jinping, Vladimir 
Putin and Masoud Pezeshkian begin deliberations on Saturday at the Bharat Mandapam to discuss the 
future of global governance. 
F