Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 254

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Massive 
A. unknown 
2. Stellar 
B. competitor 
3. Unheralded 
C. premier 
4. Contender 
D. huge 
5. Elite 
E. excellent 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Escape velocity: On what India's space sector must focus on 
India's space sector must focus on reliability and regular launches 
or much of the 20th century, a rocket tearing a white seam through the sky did for India roughly 
what football did for Argentina and Brazil. Nations shut out of the councils where economic 
and strategic weight was measured found, in a game of European origin, an arena where their 
poverty did not disqualify them. Mastery was open to anyone with nerve and skill. Space was 
other things but also India's football. A famished, newly independent republic that could 
barely feed itself nevertheless chose to gamble on rockets and atomic piles - an expensive bet on a 
future it could not yet see. In that era of a controlled economy and state broad-caster monopoly, a 
launcher rising was its own justification. The utility of its payload was secondary, in the eyes of the 
masses, to the veneer of technological competency. Today, rockets and satellites are no longer 
emblems; they are the plumbing of the information age, the unglamorous scaffolding beneath 
navigation, banking, weather and war. On the third National Space Day - the anniversary of 
Chandrayaan-3's touch-down in the lunar south polar region - Prime Minister Narendra Modi urged 20 
space-startup founders to build an "aura" that would draw the world's talent to India. But that might be a 
wrong framing married to the old view of space. A private space sector cannot harvest success merely 
because its wares are called rockets and launch vehicles; the romance that carried the state 
programme will not carry a business. 
A recent peer-reviewed analysis in Economics Letters by Alessio Terzi and Francesco Nicoli finds that 
it cost $13,302 to loft a kilogram into low-earth orbit on an Indian rocket in 2025 - costlier than China 
($5,809), Japan, Russia, Europe and the United States ($3,225), and well above the global average of 
$3,868. That is because India launches too rarely and uneconomically to rapidly build the required 
reputation for reliability. There were only five launches in 2025, against the 30 that were projected. The 
consequence is visible. GSAT-N2, at 4,700 kg too heavy for ISRO'S LVM-3, went up on a Falcon 9; 
Pixxel and Digantara - two of the 20 at Mr. Modi's meeting - rode SpaceX to orbit. SpaceX alone put 
three-quarters of the world's payload into orbit in 2025, underlining its near monopolistic stranglehold 
but also pointing to opportunities. The value of India's space sector can no longer rely on aura but in 
jobs, in long-term capital and the tax revenues that follow and, in heavy-lift launches that under-cut 
SpaceX and China. Moon bases with NASA and interplanetary reveries belong to the new imagination 
of space, and they matter - but they are the ornament, not the engine. 
F


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Veneer 
A. capability 
2. Famished 
B. facade 
3. Competency 
C. unattractive 
4. Arena 
D. hungry 
5. Unglamorous 
E. domain 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- C 

            Drawing lines: On the India-China 25th Special Representatives' talks 
India and China must be transparent about the talks on boundary dispute 
ollowing Tuesday's talks between the Special Representatives (SRs) on the boundary 
question, India and China have agreed to substantial outcomes on managing the disputed 
border. According to an eight-point consensus released on Wednesday, both countries have 
agreed to advance discussions on "an early and substantial harvest of boundary delimitation". 
They have agreed to hold next month a meeting of an expert-level mechanism on transborder 
rivers and to maintain communication on sharing hydrological data, which India has been pushing for. 
Two additional meeting points to hold talks between top military commanders will be set up, along 
with two new channels of hot-lines in the Eastern and Middle Sectors. National Security Adviser Ajit 
Doval and China's Foreign Minister Wang Yi reaffirmed the efforts taken over the past two years to keep 
the peace along the Line of Actual Control, and committed to continuing the on-going normalisation in 
relations. That the NSA's visit to Beijing took place before India hosts the BRICS Summit, on September 
12, underlined both sides' keenness to continue with this process of re-engagement, with the expected 
visit of Chinese President Xi Jinping after a gap of seven years. An October 2024 meeting between 
Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Mr. Xi kick-started this calibrated effort towards normalcy, and a 
2025 meeting in Tianjin helped continue the momentum. It is apparent that both sides see continued 
engagement at the highest level as key to sustaining this process of normalisation. 
The dual tracks of the SR meetings and the Working Mechanism for Consultation and Coordination on 
border affairs, a body comprising diplomats and military officials, have worked well towards keeping the 
borders generally stable over the past two years. The latest outcomes will certainly help in keeping the 
peace. Less clear is how both sides intend to take up the task of border delimitation. Neither side has 
explained which parts of the border they plan to delimit, or whether they are reconsidering the 2005 
agreement on Political Parameters and Guiding Principles, under which the SRs were tasked with first 
agreeing a framework to settle the boundary. While both sides in Beijing reaffirmed the 2005 agreement, 
Article 10 of its text notes that it is only on the basis of the framework that both sides can delineate the 
boundary. Tangible progress on the border dispute must certainly be welcomed. However, 
agreements made without public visibility, notwithstanding their merit, may invite suspicion. As India 
and China continue negotiating their long-running boundary question, it is imperative that they bring 
their publics along. 
F