Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 174

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Revealed 
A. weak 
2. Curtailed 
B. reduced 
3. Tenuous 
C. disclosed 
4. Tussle 
D. complex 
5. Complicated 
E. conflict 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- B 
3- A 
4- E 
5- D 

            Building bridges: On Central Bank Digital Currency and BRICS 
The benefits of cross-border CBDC payments could outweigh costs 
The RBI's reported moves towards encouraging India's BRICS partners to link their digital 
currencies with the RBI's own Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) are sensible but one 
that could pose some risks. According to news reports, the RBI has recommended to the 
Centre that a proposal connecting the CBDCs of the BRICS countries be made part of the 
agenda for the 2026 BRICS summit in India. This is a natural progression of India's push 
during its presidency of the G-20 in 2023 for international cooperation and standardisation on 
cryptocurrencies. The RBI has historically been extremely conservative about private cryptocurrencies, 
repeatedly calling for a ban, and progressive about CBDCs, arguing that they have multiple uses. Its 
stance seems largely correct - it recognises the evident risks of cryptocurrencies as assets to invest in, 
but sees the advantages of the blockchain as the backbone of payments infrastructure. While a ban on 
private cryptocurrencies seems extreme, their widespread adoption does expose the public to extreme 
volatility, fraud potential, and an erosion of wealth. CBDCs have the advantage of a sovereign 
guarantee and are also not interest-bearing. They are not only safe but will also not attract people 
looking to make returns. That said, India in particular has little use for a domestic CBDC. As digital 
payments go, the UPI infrastructure has proven to be excellent but has also far too big a headstart for 
CBDC to overcome. This is why the RBI's attempts to use CBDCs for international payments are a 
sensible approach. 
Cross-border payments are a significant channel for black and laundered money. Any attempts to bring 
further transparency to such flows are welcome. Blockchains are excellent instruments for this purpose. 
They form transparent and immutable records of transactions and can be coded to provide relevant 
details such as the points of origin and destination. A BRICS agreement on such a payment 
infrastructure could further mandate that payments be linked to national identity numbers or tax 
departments. CBDC payments would also help ease some of India's stickier international payments 
issues. Payments to Russia and Iran, for example, will become easier since the SWIFT network is not 
available to either country. On the other hand, exactly such payments and the related move away from 
the dollar will inevitably anger U.S. President Donald Trump. He has already warned of additional tariffs 
on BRICS countries should they move away from the dollar. That said, with 50% tariffs in place, India 
needs to see whether incremental tariffs will actually hurt. The benefits of cross-border CBDC 
payments could still outweigh the costs. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Rebuke 
A. debris 
2. Entrench 
B. sedition 
3. Treason 
C. reprimand 
4. Offensive 
D. assault 
5. Ruins 
E. establish firmly 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- B 
4- D 
5- A 

            Bridging the Gulf: On India, defence ties with Gulf nations 
India must tread cautiously as it negotiates defence ties with Gulf nations 
The nearly two-hour visit of UAE President and Ruler of Abu Dhabi Sheikh Mohamed bin 
Zayed Al Nahyan (MbZ) to Delhi on Monday, with only one meeting with Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi, ended with a number of far-reaching outcomes. The UAE is India's third-
largest trading partner, its second biggest export destination, seventh biggest foreign investor, 
and concluded its first bilateral trade agreement with India in 2022. The agreements on 
Monday focused on the economic partnership - a commitment to double bilateral trade to $200 billion, 
an LNG deal for $3 billion and UAE investment in Gujarat. However, the major announcement was the 
intention to conclude a framework agreement for an India-UAE "Strategic Defence partnership", the first 
of its kind. Details are still to be revealed. However, it is clear that West Asia and South Asia will be 
watching closely given the complicated security environment in both regions. MbZ's sudden India visit 
came amidst heightened tensions between the UAE and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Both countries 
were once a part of the same military coalition against the Houthi uprising in 2014. Their power tussle 
has also intensified over forces in Sudan, and the lack of communication between MbZ and Saudi 
leader Mohammed Bin Salman (MbS) is now being called the Gulf region's new "cold war". In addition, 
protests in Iran and the U.S.'s threats to intervene as well as the tenuous Gaza ceasefire and U.S. 
President Donald Trump's plans for a Board of Peace have led to concerns about internal and external 
instability. Israel's bombing in Qatar in September 2025, that led the Saudi government to rush a 
"mutual defence pact" with Pakistan, and reported negotiations of including Turkiye in the pact, portend 
a more complex and unstable region, with repercussions for India. 
The announcement of the UAE-India negotiations for a defence agreement is being read by some as a 
possible military front to counter other regional alignments. Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri attempted to 
downplay concerns, holding that the treaty was not about India's involvement in "a hypothetical future 
scenario in the region". Even so, the government must keep in mind ties not only with the UAE but also 
other important Gulf region countries, where nearly 10 million Indians reside. The GCC-area is a major 
energy source, especially as U.S. and EU sanctions have curtailed all of India's other important 
sources. India's cross-regional connectivity plans through Iran's Chabahar port, the International North 
South Transport Corridor and the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor have been imperilled 
due to all the tensions as their future depends on cooperation with all players there. With important 
relationships in the region, and so many faultlines within it, India has little option but to tread lightly. 
T