Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 225

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Dreading 
A. obstinate 
2. Exceptional 
B. nurturing 
3. Incubation 
C. extraordinary 
4. Vast 
D. worrying 
5. Stubborn 
E. enormous 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- B 
4- E 
5- A 

            Lopsided solution: On syrup-based medicines, doctor's prescription 
Regulatory oversight for pharmaceuticals needs to improve in India 
s part of an overarching attempt to restore confidence in India's pharmaceutical supply 
chain after a series of deaths damaged the country's reputation as a drug exporter, the 
government has required a doctor's prescription for individuals to purchase syrup-based 
medicines. However, while it seems like a credible measure, it is also defensive rather 
than reformist. The Union Health Ministry has removed the term "syrup" from Schedule K of 
the Drugs Rules 1945, a change it had signalled when it issued the draft notification in December 2025, 
thus requiring cough syrups to be sold only with a prescription, through licensed pharmacies. These 
products were singled out after ethylene glycol (EG) and diethylene glycol (DEG) contamination in 
India-made cough syrups killed over 300 children across several countries since 2022. The WHO's 
warnings in 2022 and 2023 also undermined assumptions that India's export quality controls were 
effective and functioning independently. But beyond contamination, doctors have long raised concerns 
about how cough syrups are formulated and used. Many over-the-counter (OTC) cough syrups are 
'cocktails' of bronchodilators, antihistamines, and decongestants, which can cause tremors and heart 
palpitations, extreme sedation or paradoxical agitation in infants, and blood pressure effects. The 
American Academy of Pediatrics has said that cough suppressants are quite ineffective for children 
under six years and may even be dangerous, as they can mask underlying conditions such as 
pneumonia or asthma. Yet, India's entrenched OTC culture makes pharmacists de facto primary care 
providers in many rural and semi-urban areas. 
Most importantly, however, the contamination was the result of failures in manufacturing quality control, 
testing of raw materials, and regulatory oversight rather than consumer access. Even now, requiring a 
prescription may reduce inappropriate use and push patients away from self-medication, but it could 
never prevent contaminated products from reaching the market in the first place. The fundamental issue 
is that the government continues to tolerate the pharmaceutical lobby's argument that high-end testing 
requirements - for stronger quality control and ultimately better drugs - will bankrupt smaller 
manufacturers. Second, while the Indian Pharmacopoeia and the Pharmacopoeia Internationalis updated 
their analytical methods to detect EG/DEG following the deaths, failures in batch testing and 
enforcement persist. As a result, while India has around three dozen State drug controllers, they are 
chronically understaffed - so without a large increase in the inspectorate, the notification is likely to be 
ignored sans consequence in rural areas. In a globalised economy, subpar enforcement for medicines 
A

            in even one country is dangerous; that is infinitely more so in a country aspiring to remain the world's 
pharmacy.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Contamination 
A. shivers 
2. Sans 
B. developed 
3. Formulated 
C. impurity 
4. Credible 
D. without 
5. Tremors 
E. believable 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- B 
4- E 
5- A 

            Right of way: On the right to walk on demarcated footpaths 
India needs to build more footpaths to help pedestrians walk freely 
s part of the Supreme Court's expansion of Article 21 since the 1970s, it has declared the 
right to walk on demarcated footpaths a fundamental right. The Bench of Justices P.S. 
Narasimha and Atul S. Chandurkar reaffirmed the right in a case seeking higher 
compensation for a five-year-old boy's death after being struck and killed by a tanker lorry in 
Karnataka. As motorised transport has become more widespread, the Bench noted with 
regret that walking has become an inconvenience, with motorists often treating pedestrians as a 
'nuisance' to be tolerated or cleared. In the absence of a national law governing pedestrian rights, 
responsibility for pedestrian safety is split across municipal laws, town-planning statutes, and street 
design guidelines. As such, pedestrians are considered to be safe if they face no immediate physical 
harm. Most cities also lack continuous unobstructed footpaths; where footpaths do exist, they are often 
encroached on by parking, vendors, utilities, and construction debris, and competing pressures such as 
road widening work. 
While a right to walk is desirable, the ideas that pavements belong to pedestrians and that they have 
right of way should be cultural in order to endure. Rights-based legislation in India that has sought to 
change public culture has had mixed success. The Street Vendors Act 2014 sought to protect vendors 
from harassment as under Article 19(1)(g). But in most cities, municipalities still conduct "eviction 
drives" while implementation has lagged because the Act requires surveys, town vending committees, 
and the demarcation of vending zones - processes that many urban local bodies have delayed or 
simply abandoned. Weak implementation has allowed informal rent-seeking by officials to persist in 
some cases. The new judgment is also likely to set up disputes with the 2014 Act. Second, the 
Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products Act 2003 curtailed public smoking over 20 years, but not by 
"restitutionary remedies", as the Court has suggested for walking, but with consistent social messaging 
and small, immediate fines. Finally, despite strict laws and 'Swachh Bharat' mandates, the culture of 
littering remains because the law focuses on citizens' duty to segregate whereas the state has often 
overlooked its duty to collect segregated waste. Similarly, if the state does not build footpaths, the 
citizen's right will be meaningless. The Court's constitutional nudge may thus lead to no real change if it 
remains a legal tool for compensation after a tragedy. A state using it to 'cleanse' streets of informal 
commercial activity could also gentrify these public spaces and criminalise the survival of the urban 
poor. The nudge's principal path to success will be by moving the state's funds towards pedestrian 
infrastructure. 
A