Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 165

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Unveil 
A. proposed 
2. Harsh 
B. mediate 
3. Pitched 
C. encourage 
4. Nurture 
D. reveal 
5. Intervene 
E. strict 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- B 

            Too good to last: On November's industrial data, the Indian economy 
The headwinds facing the economy are not going away soon 
India's relatively strong industrial performance in November 2025, especially driven by the 
manufacturing sector as it was, was more likely a flash in the pan than the start of a consistent 
trend. The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) grew 6.7% in November, the fastest growth rate in 25 
months. Within this, the manufacturing sector grew 8%, which also was the fastest in 25 months. 
On the face of it, this would look remarkable and heartening, especially since October 2025 had 
seen growth slow to a 14-month low. However, this surge in growth was more likely due to seasonal and 
one-off factors. According to economists, the strongest push for growth came from sellers re-stocking 
their supplies following the festive season. The second factor is that the government timed the Goods 
and Services Tax (GST) rate reductions to coincide with the festive season. This temporary bump in 
demand would have further eroded stock levels, which then need to be replenished. In fact, the 
consumer durables and non-durables sectors saw growth in November rebounding to 10.3% and 7.3%, 
a 12-month and 25-month high, respectively. The third factor that seems to have worked in November 
is the bounce back of the mining sector following two months of contractions due to an unseasonably 
long monsoon. The mining sector saw growth come in at a reasonably strong 5.4% in November 2025. 
All of these are legitimate reasons for growth to pick up, but are not sustainable ones. The electricity and 
mining sectors will be bound by the vagaries of the weather. Overall consumer demand has been 
sluggish and industry players are talking of the GST-related boost already ebbing. And the festive 
season will not come back around until October-November 2026. 
In fact, the IIP grew just 3.3% in the longer April-November period, the lowest for these eight months in 
any of the post-COVID-19 pandemic years. The consumer non-durables sector contracted 1% during 
this period, showing that the boost in November is not indicative. That the strong growth in November is 
more an anomaly than a sign of things to come should not come as a surprise. The Reserve Bank of 
India, earlier this month, predicted that growth in Q3 would slow to 7% from an average of 8% in the 
first two quarters. The fourth quarter is predicted to slow even further, to 6.5%. All of the previous 
headwinds still exist. The 50% tariffs by the U.S. are still in place, private investment remains sluggish, 
foreign capital is pulling out of the country, the weakening rupee is making imports more expensive for 
an import-dependent economy, real wages are not growing fast enough, and consumer demand remains 
tepid. Ironically, November's positive industrial data bring into focus the headwinds the economy is 
really facing. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Flaws 
A. reluctant 
2. Unwilling 
B. clearly 
3. Assemble 
C. trim 
4. Obviously 
D. faults 
5. Prune 
E. collect 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            The lost message: On shallow symbolism 
Assurances of state protection for minorities must go beyond symbolism 
rime Minister Narendra Modi's participation in a Christmas morning service on December 
25, at the Cathedral Church of the Redemption in the national capital, was one that was 
noticed globally. Mr. Modi has hosted or visited Christian leaders or institutions during 
festivals, but taking part in a complete worship service at a church was a first for him. Mr. 
Modi also shared greetings and good wishes for peace, compassion and harmony on his 
social media account, invoking the teachings of Jesus Christ. Amid numerous reports of 
intimidation and violence against Christians during the Christmas season and even prior to 
that, Mr. Modi's church visit was meant as a gesture of reassurance for the minority community in 
India's diverse social landscape. Such symbolism of Governors participating in diverse traditions has 
been a feature of political pragmatism and also a genuine reflection of the syncretism that 
characterises Indian nationhood. The RSS, Mr. Modi's ideological cradle, has long considered 
Christianity and Islam as foreign to India. However, in recent years, it has sought to include these faiths 
also in its notion of national identity, and Mr. Modi's participation in the Christmas worship could be 
seen as yet another step toward moderation and tolerance. 
But if that indeed is the message that Mr. Modi wants to convey, he needs to do it stronger and clearer 
for State governments and police forces under the control of his party to hear. Vandalism and violence 
against Christian places of worship and festivities have been recurring. From Assam, Kerala, Uttar 
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Odisha, and other places, reported cases include disruption of worship 
and physical violence against church leaders. Spurious charges of conversion - which anyway is a 
matter of personal liberty and freedom of religion protected by the Constitution - are often raised to 
justify this violence. Even commercial activities related to Christmas have been disrupted by mobs in 
various parts of the country. Most of these incidents are linked to Sangh Parivar-affiliated individuals or 
groups. Even after Mr. Modi's Christmas message, no meaningful police action has followed against the 
mobs that indulged in the violence. On the contrary, intimidation and threats of violence against 
Christians and Muslims have continued, including by BJP leaders. All this points to the inadequacy of the 
symbolism of Mr. Modi's church visit. It would have been meaningful had the troublemakers and the law 
enforcers been sent the message. There is no sign of that, and that means the BJP either does not want 
to, or cannot, do anything more than shallow symbolism in favour of pluralism in India. 
P