Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 252

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Curious 
A. optimize 
2. Controversial 
B. oppose 
3. Foster 
C. disputed 
4. Resist 
D. strange 
5. Streamline 
E. encourage 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Socialist surge: On the rise of democratic socialism in the U.S. 
Affordability issues propel democratic socialists in the U.S. 
s the Trump administration persists with its blunderbuss reshaping of American foreign 
policy - a marriage of hyper imperialism, with wars in West Asia, a de facto capture of 
power in Venezuela and the strangling of Cuba's fuel trade, and isolationism, seen in 
withdrawals from multilateral institutions and tariffs imposed on a whim - the world has 
been waiting for a political alternative to Trumpism to take shape. After 2024, when a vapid 
Democratic Party displayed little ideological gumption on foreign policy, welfare or taking on the 
plutocrats reshaping American democracy, the prospects looked slim. Then, in November 2025, 
Zohran Mamdani won New York City on a platform of de-commodification - placing citizens' needs above 
market shibboleths - while openly calling Israel's war on Gaza a genocide. His victory did more than 
capture New York's imagination. It set off an insurgency by democratic socialists within Democratic 
Party ranks. In Michigan's August 4 primary, Abdul El-Sayed, a progressive backed by Independent 
Senator Bernie Sanders, won the Democratic nomination for the Senate despite pro-Israel groups 
spending heavily against him. Angie Nixon, a three-term State legislator who joined the Democratic 
Socialists of America in June, has won Florida's Democratic Senate nomination, having spent merely 
$60,000 on advertising as opposed to her moderate opponent's $2.2 million. Such results matter in a 
country where socialism has been used to evoke the Red Scare, even decades after the Cold War. 
Mr. Sanders, whose unabashed democratic socialism is closer to European social democracy than to 
state ownership of the means of production, ran two presidential campaigns that prepared this ground 
while the likes of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and others showed its electoral viability in Democratic 
strongholds in House elections. In 2026, a new generation of democratic socialists has sharpened its 
methods and its reach. The focus on affordability in childcare, rent freeze, Medicare for All and taxing 
the rich while breaking with the Democratic Party's foreign policy consensus, including on funding Israel's 
military, has carried them beyond strong-holds such as New York. The new cohort has not only won 
primaries but also registered a shift in the political outlook of many Americans. But caution is warranted. 
Taking on the Republican machine in November will be a far tougher task, especially if the Democratic 
establishment does not rally around its insurgents against Trumpism. Yet, supporters point to a deeply 
unpopular Mr. Trump, and a welfare-first message that could cut across the U.S.'s culture wars the 
Republicans will keep stoking. For the Global South, including Indians, the rise of democratic socialism 
as a viable force in the U.S. will be welcome, as its emphasis rests on fair trade and multilateral 
engagement, besides an end to Washington's forever wars. 
A


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Vapid 
A. provoke 
2. Evoke 
B. choking 
3. Stoking 
C. triumph 
4. Strangling 
D. insipid 
5. Victory 
E. recall 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Saving faces: On protests, biometric surveillance 
Use of facial recognition equipment at protest sites is worrisome 
India appears to be normalising the technical ability to subject political gatherings to searchable 
biometric surveillance without first having settled, through legislation and judicial oversight, the 
circumstances in which the state may lawfully do so. While the Delhi Police have continued to deny 
the use of excessive force and manhandling people involved in the Cockroach Janta Party 
protests, contrary to protestors' testimonies, facial recognition equipment was present at the 
protest site while the demonstrations were on. According to its affidavit to the Supreme Court of India, 
the police deployed a facial recognition system (including Artificial Intelligence-enabled cameras to scan 
faces in real-time against a database), a mobile surveillance van and a command and control vehicle, 
smart spectacles for identifying individuals on the move, and drones and videographers; the van and the 
spectacles have been tied to private contractors. [A] The police have also not [1] addresed whether 
actual [2] biometric [3] processing occurred with every [4] indivisual within the range of cameras. 
Even if the police discarded the images associated with infructuous checks, that the data may have 
been accessible to private contractors, whose terms of engagement are unclear, is worrisome. 
However, no statute governs the use of facial recognition systems; the Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act, whose data-processing obligations are not yet in force, still makes broad exemptions 
for state agencies. The Automated Facial Recognition System of the National Crime Records Bureau 
can be used to identify criminals, unidentified bodies, and so on, and the Criminal Procedure 
(Identification) Act 2022 expanded the set of records that the police may collect from specified persons. 
However, these actions are still only allowed vis-à-vis specific groups of people. 
Irrespective of the constitutional validity of the police's actions, the chilling effect on potential 
participants may also curtail the right to protest. The state has to pass a well-established proportionality 
test when interfering with the right to privacy. While the first question - the existence of a legitimate 
objective - already poses important challenges to facial recognition en masse, the technology is 
indiscriminate at the point of capture. After all, there is a less restrictive but equally effective alternative 
(e.g., conventional policing). At this time, far too many questions are unanswered - including over the 
data-processing agreements, access, legal provisions that authorised major decisions, and the expected 
rate of false positives for the use of facial recognition with all protesters to be justified. 
I