Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 199

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Charred 
A. burnt 
2. Degradation 
B. disclosed 
3. Allocated 
C. assigned 
4. Sedated 
D. numbed 
5. Revealed 
E. deterioration 
Answer: 
1-A 
2- E 
3- C 
4- D 
5- B 

            Losing the way: On ISRO and issues with its NavIC constellation 
ISRO must fix issues before launch of next second-generation satellites 
SRO's NavIC constellation, for which it has launched 11 satellites since 2013, is in operational 
distress. Only three satellites remain capable of providing position, navigation, and timing (PNT) 
services, leaving the constellation unable to fulfil its purpose of replacing the U.S.'s GPS system 
over the Indian subcontinent. A PNT constellation requires at least four PNT-capable satellites, and 
India had only four until ISRO said an atomic clock onboard the IRNSS-1F satellite failed on March 
13. The constellation's first-generation satellites use rubidium atomic clocks made by Swiss company 
SpectraTime, and which have been dogged by failure. ISRO's latest attempt to launch a second-
generation satellite, NVS-02, was abortive after the machine was left in the wrong orbit. IRNSS-1F, 
launched in March 2016, completed its 10-year design life just three days before its clock failed. Eight 
other satellites have either been decommissioned, have failed to reach orbit or have bad clocks. In 
2018, ISRO transitioned to using indigenous rubidium atomic clocks, developed by the ISRO-Space 
Applications Centre. NVS-01, launched in May 2023, was the first to carry the device; all second-
generation NVS series satellites will too. 
Part of NavIC's genesis was the U.S.'s refusal to share GPS data over Kargil during the 1999 war, and it 
continues to function largely as a defence programme managed by ISRO. However, while the space 
sector reforms in 2020 vouchsafed ISRO for R&D and NewSpace India for commercialisation, the 
absence of a national space law leaves ISRO acting as both designer and operator of NavIC, 
overextending the agency. Equally, India lacks a counterpart to the GPS Directorate or EUSPA, which 
respectively manage the GPS and Galileo constellations. The new generation of rubidium clocks also 
faces procurement challenges and ISRO has proposed equipping each satellite with five atomic clocks 
instead of the previous three. The constellation has been degrading faster than it can be replenished, 
due to ISRO's poor launch rate. This problem stems from several factors, including issues with the 
PSLV, an insufficient budget that must maintain a PNT constellation, an upcoming human spaceflight 
programme, several earth-observation satellites, and R&D for new rockets. ISRO is also hand-holding 
start-ups that have yet to get a grip on launching rockets to low-earth orbit. Meanwhile, the Union 
government has encouraged electronics manufacturers to support the L1 band of the NVS series for 
better interoperability with GPS while expecting its use by the armed forces. For all these reasons, 
ISRO's plan to launch three more second-generation satellites in 2026 does little to inspire confidence. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Transitioned 
A. hardship 
2. Distress 
B. futile 
3. Dogged 
C. switched 
4. Abortive 
D. motivated 
5. Encouraged 
E. troubled 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- D 

            Restoring rights: on the Hamsaanandini Nanduri vs Union Of India case 
Adoptive mothers have the same rights as biological mothers 
ourts with a tinge of judicial activism have expansively interpreted the Constitution to secure 
fresh rights for citizens, over the years. In the latest instance, a view that encompasses 
evolving social systems, and a keen feminist perspective, taken by the highest court in the 
land, has recognised maternity leave for working women as a basic human right. The Court 
ruled that adoptive mothers are entitled to 12 weeks of paid maternity leave, regardless of the 
child's age at the time of adoption, thus striking down a previous restriction allowing maternity leave 
only for women who had applied for adopting children less than three months of age. The judgment, 
delivered by Justices J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, came in response to petitioner Hamsaanandini 
Nanduri challenging this provision in the Maternity Benefit Act, recently replaced by the Code on Social 
Security. She also pointed out that the legal process of adoption itself took over three months to be 
completed. [A] The judges [P] observed that an adoptive mother had the same rights and [Q] 
obligations towards the child as a [R] biological mother. Reading adoption as an 'expression of 
reproductive autonomy', the Court said that the emotional bond with the child has to be consciously 
nurtured through time, presence and sustained caregiving. "Adoption is an equally valid pathway for 
the creation of a family. It is not biology that constitutes a family of a mother, father, and children, rather, 
it is the shared meaning, responsibility, and emotional bonds that sustain such a relationship," it 
explained. Maternity benefit is extended to working women during the early phase of motherhood to 
support them financially and provide economic security without them having to depend on family 
members. This equally applies to biological and adoptive mothers. Further, the judges urged the 
government to legally recognise paternity leave as a social security benefit, noting that parenthood is not 
a solitary function performed by one parent alone. 
The judges have, with one judgment, conferred equal rights to adoptive parents, and restored child 
rearing to a gender-neutral parenting paradigm. The patriarchal enabling system has feminised raising 
children, leading to it being undervalued or inadequately compensated, if it ever is. Nobel winner Claudia 
Goldin's work has identified that the gender pay gap often emerges with the birth of a first child. The top 
court has given India an opportunity to set right the inadequate laws governing maternity leave in 
adoption, and to a large extent, the gender imbalance in society. It is the duty now of the state to make 
sure that this progressive judgment finds effective implementation in every corner of the country. 
C