Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 247

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Elevated 
A. wise 
2. Truce 
B. restricted 
3. Hedging 
C. raised 
4. Prudent 
D. safeguarding 
5. Confined 
E. ceasefire 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- D 
4- A 
5- B 

            Podium finish: On India at the Glasgow Commonwealth Games 
India's women boxers were the highlight of the Glasgow Commonwealth Games 
In the truncated Commonwealth Games in Glasgow, India performed well, exceeding expectations 
and retaining fourth place behind developed nations such as Australia, England, and Canada, 
despite a sharp drop in medals from 61 to 39, including 13 gold, 17 silver, and nine bronze. The 
gold rush on the penultimate day, powered by the spectacular performance of the boxers who 
won seven gold and three silver medals, improved India's position. While some weight classes 
had weaker draws, several categories posed strong challenges. Propelled by determination and hard 
work, five women boxers - Sakshi Chaudhary, Preeti Pawar, Jaismine Lamboria, Priya Ghanghas, and 
Arundhati Choudhary - and two men, Sachin Siwach and Ankush Panghal, ensured India's best-ever 
showing of 10 medals, three more than that in the last edition. The women boxers' fearless approach 
established them as a force to reckon with. India won 16 medals in athletics and para-athletics, with 
notable contributions from para-athletes Dilip Gavit, Soman Rana, and Sharmila Dhankar. In world-class 
fields, the country's athletes won 10 medals compared to eight in Birmingham 2022. Neeraj Chopra 
recovered from injury to take a creditable silver and lead the country to twin-medal glory in javelin along 
with Yashvir Singh and underlined India's rising status as a javelin powerhouse. Other moments to 
cherish included triple jumpers Praveen Chithravel and Selva Prabhu's twin podium finishes, Gulveer 
Singh becoming the first Indian to medal in 5000m and 10000m, Murali Sreeshankar winning his second 
straight long jump silver, Tejaswin Shankar claiming the country's first-ever decathlon medal, and 
Sarvesh Kushare pocketing a high jump silver. 
Asmita Dey and Harsh Singh sprang a surprise by winning the country's first gold medals in judo, while 
Mirabai Chanu lived up to her billing to clinch her third successive gold medal. She led Indian lifters to 
a significant haul of eight medals. The country's strong show, against an expectation of around 30 
medals, helped the contingent leave Glasgow on a high as Ahmedabad prepares to host a bigger 
Games offering more medals in 2030. Indian athletes' praiseworthy performance in Glasgow has raised 
hopes for the Aichi-Nagoya Asian Games next month, where a bigger haul is expected from a wider 
range of disciplines. While India is capable of securing impressive medal collections at the 
Commonwealth and Asian Games, it needs to raise its level manifold to be counted among the best 
globally. Aspiring to host the 2036 Olympics, it must identify priority sports and invest in them to ensure 
a higher finish, even while waging a perennial war against doping. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Fragmented 
A. cancelled 
2. Immense 
B. vast 
3. Resisted 
C. sharp 
4. Stark 
D. scattered 
5. Revoked 
E. opposed 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- B 
3- E 
4- C 
5- A 

            No path to peace: On Israel's rejection of peace plan 
Israel's rejection of peace plan shows its intent to subjugate Gaza 
It has been nearly a year since the U.S.-brokered ceasefire supposedly ended Israel's 
bombardment and decimation of Gaza. But since the ceasefire, Israel's strikes have killed nearly 
1,300 Palestinians and its forces hold about 65% of the Strip, where much of the two-million 
population lives in tent camps amid rubble with schools and hospitals shut. Aid remains severely 
restricted, while Israel has blocked reconstruction, insisting that Hamas disarm first. Yet, when 
Hamas agreed to decommission and store its heavy weapons in phases, with U.S.-backed Palestinian 
technocrats in step with a gradual Israeli withdrawal - as part of a 15-point road map proposed by the 
Donald Trump-led "Board of Peace" - Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu refused to accept this. 
He said Israel was "ruling out the 15-point document" and that there would be no withdrawal until 
Hamas gave up "heavy weapons, lighter weapons, all weapons". Israel is keen not only on Hamas's 
disarmament, but also on the total subjugation of Gaza, at a continuing cost to civilians and children. It 
faces genocide proceedings at the International Court of Justice while the International Criminal Court 
has issued an arrest warrant for Mr. Netanyahu, who also faces a corruption trial still before the courts. 
By promising the complete destruction of Hamas, he has been trying to stay in power by retaining the 
support of the jingoistic right wing; any concession on withdrawal would invite political repercussions 
for his right-wing coalition in elections due in October. 
The war on Iran launched by Mr. Trump and Israel on February 28 to effect a regime change has 
proved to be a disaster, setting off a fuel crisis that has affected several countries. With the Strait of 
Hormuz barely functioning, rising costs of American petrol and fertilizers have begun to affect the U.S. 
economy, leading to Mr Trump seeking a face-saving breakthrough in West Asia. Waning sympathy for 
Israel as the U.S. mid-term elections approach also explains the Board's proposal. While the farcical 
Board's vision of a "New Gaza" - free-trade zone, privatised infrastructure, no Palestinian 
representation on the Board - resembles an attempt at naked profiteering following the disastrous 
conflict, the 15-point proposal would actually be welcomed by the battered people of Gaza. For Hamas, 
which has few cards left, disarmament is an imperative, but must be matched by Israeli withdrawal. Mr 
Trump and his advisers must ask whether Washington's decades-long Faustian bargain - arming 
and shielding a militarised Israel on Israel's terms - is worth continuing, or whether it will use its 
leverage as Israel's principal arms supplier to compel a genuine withdrawal. It is still not too late. 
I