Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 215

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Crest 
A. fade 
2. Plunging 
B. dropping 
3. Predict 
C. contracting 
4. Disappear 
D. forecast 
5. Shrinking 
E. peak 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- B 
3- D 
4- A 
5- C 

            Score board: On the CBSE's credibility, its examination reforms 
The CBSE was ill-prepared for the exam reforms it undertook 
India's education system is under severe stress. The NEET fiasco which caused immense 
suffering to nearly 22 lakh students exposed the deep structural flaws within the National Testing 
Agency, where one part conducts the JEE seamlessly while another appears clueless and 
completely out of its depth in conducting another high-stakes examination. The Central Board of 
Secondary Education (CBSE) has caused much anxiety to and harmed a significant proportion of 
some 18 lakh students who took the Class 12 exams this year and whose answer scripts were evaluated 
through On Screen Marking (OSM) for the first time. It appears that little training was given to the staff 
scanning the answer sheets, and that no SOPs were in place after consultations with experts. Yet, some 
one crore sets of answer papers were scanned in record time. Evaluators were not really put through the 
paces; not prepped fully for the new interface; nor their screen fatigue evaluated for its impact on 
scoring. Ideally, OSM should first be tested on a smaller subset of answer sheets in parallel with the 
regular mode to evaluate whether there is any statistically significant deviation in scores between the two 
methods. This would have borne out whether the system was truly prepared for what was presented as 
a reform and allowed corrective measures before full-scale adoption. 
It appears none of this was done. The result: a clear reduction in student performance, which was too 
significant to be dismissed as coincidence. When students received their scanned answer scripts, their 
fears appeared to have been validated. Widespread reports of mismatched scripts, unevaluated 
supplementary sheets, and unclear scans flooded social media, while many students complained that 
they had not received their scanned copies. To tamp down anger, the CBSE had slashed the fees for 
accessing answer scripts and re-evaluation while promising refunds where re-evaluation was found to be 
justified. More than 1.25 lakh students applied for accessing nearly four lakh answer scripts within a few 
hours of the window opening. Since then, the deadline for script access was extended repeatedly 
before ending on May 25. The CBSE has not yet revealed the plans for re-evaluation which is likely to 
be of a higher order this year. The Education Minister has said that the IITs have now been involved in 
troubleshooting. What is at stake is not just the CBSE's credibility but also the future of lakhs of 
students. The immediate task before the CBSE is to carry out the re-evaluation to the satisfaction of 
students. A long-term task would be to honestly address the root causes of the fiasco and implement 
solutions. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Slashed 
A. smoothly 
2. Exposed 
B. failure 
3. Seamlessly 
C. reduced 
4. Fiasco 
D. enormous 
5. Immense 
E. revealed 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Partial digitisation 
Cumbersome processes from analogue era remain despite more online services 
igitising citizen services is a process full of promise and empowerment. In India, making 
processes faceless carries the added benefit of relief from the rent seeking that is rife in 
government offices. The more services are available online, the better. It is possible; in 
December 2024, Estonia digitised the last citizen service that only remained possible on 
paper: divorce. In this light, participation of private firms such as WhatsApp in getting 
digital services delivered to more people, as in Gujarat, is welcome. This being said, the digital service 
delivery in India has several issues: a lack of trust towards the citizen, in spite of the citizen-centricity 
touted as the reason for their existence; systematic underinvestment leading to lapses in availability and 
reliability; and lax cybersecurity. In many cases involving the most dysfunctional online services, the 
responsibility lies with States, such as property records registration and civil acts such as marriage. But 
even in those where the remit lies with the Union government, there are serious issues. 
While lip service is paid to the importance of securing key cybersecurity infrastructure, serious 
vulnerabilities remain. Security of data residing on public databases is taken for granted, and 
institutions such as the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-in) have failed to rise to 
the challenge. Also, on myriad forms online, users are forced to type and submit the same details 
repeatedly, even though systems such as Digi Locker exist that are purported to ease this process. A 
shadow of a "mismatch" can anyway result, and few if any processes allow citizens to cure defects 
without redoing the entire process - a shocking lapse punishing routine variations in names and 
spellings. Scant regard is paid to the accessibility and intuitive design, leaving persons with disabilities 
and vast swathes of the population dependent on outside assistance to go through a self-service 
process. Some systems are left defunct or sputtering years after their launch: take e-Sanad, launched a 
decade ago to help people legalise personal documents while travelling abroad or emigrating. Few 
States have been on-boarded, leaving other residents to deal with middlemen and touts in the pre-
verification process that precedes the so-called Apostille stamp they need on a time-bound schedule. As 
with this process, the analogue equivalents of broken digital services remain inaccessible and 
cumbersome, such as updating details on Aadhaar, which requires visiting a physical office. The 
creation of Digital Public Infrastructure such as UPI and Aadhaar are of little use without reciprocal trust 
by the government and a commitment to uptime and service quality. 
D