Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 197

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Constraints 
A. soaring 
2. Onus 
B. responsibility 
3. Clues 
C. extremely fast 
4. Blistering 
D. restrictions 
5. Skyrocketing 
E. hints 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- B 
3- E 
4- C 
5- A 

            House decorum: on the functioning of Parliament 
The ruling party and the opposition must rise above partisanship 
The Lok Sabha rejected by voice vote, on March 11, a resolution under Article 94(C) of the 
Constitution for the removal of Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla from office, but only after a 
hostile debate on the functioning of the House deepened the wedge between the 
government and the Opposition. In principle, Parliament is the foundation of representative 
democracy, and its routine functions act as an instrument that holds the cabinet accountable. 
As a forum for government-Opposition interaction, it is meant to operate in a structured, methodical way. 
Single-party dominance has eroded all these formal and informal functions of legislatures at all levels, 
and the Lok Sabha, sadly, has become a platform for political partisanship. In recent years, the chairs of 
the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha have been dragged into political conflict. In 2024, there was an 
Opposition resolution to remove Jagdeep Dhankhar as Rajya Sabha Chairman. Though the resolution 
did not pass, he resigned as Vice-President for unexplained reasons. The Opposition has raised 
concerns over the Lok Sabha's functioning, but what precipitated their protest into a formal resolution 
for Mr. Birla's removal was, possibly, his statement that he had confidential knowledge that Congress 
women MPs might act against Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the House floor. 
Opposition MPs are routinely denied the opportunity to raise substantive issues, though the government 
cites statistics in its rebuttal. The Speaker had disallowed Leader of the Opposition (Lok Sabha) Rahul 
Gandhi from quoting former Army Chief M.M. Naravane's unpublished memoir, which discusses Prime 
Minister Narendra Modi's role in the 2020 military standoff with China. The microphones of Opposition 
MPs are frequently switched off during debates. The Opposition has pointed out that in February, Mr. 
Gandhi was interrupted 20 times while speaking during the Motion of Thanks to the President's Address 
and also blocked from raising the Gautam Adani investigation issue in the U.S. and the EU-U.S. trade 
deal. The government argued that the Opposition was given 56% of Zero Hour time, and that NDA MPs, 
despite their majority, received 321 supplementary questions against the Opposition's 364 during his 
tenure. Home Minister Amit Shah said that the House's productivity during Mr. Birla's tenure had been 
high and that it had debated in 14 regional languages. Mr. Shah also cornered Mr. Gandhi for being 
frequently absent from the House. The resolution and the debate manifested a deeply fractured polity 
in need of urgent corrective measures. The ruling majority and the Opposition must rise above 
partisanship and restore the majesty of Parliament. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Standoff 
A. record 
2. Rebuttal 
B. dignity 
3. Memoir 
C. deadlock 
4. Eroded 
D. weakened 
5. Majesty 
E. refutation 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- D 
5- B 

            Beginning and end: On the right to die with dignity 
The state must allow its citizens the right to die with dignity 
The incontrovertible nature of both life and death makes them fiendishly difficult to legislate 
or adjudicate. Interfering with the very elemental beginning and end points of life must seem 
daunting. Nothing else can explain the long dalliance that laws have had with euthanasia to 
facilitate the intentional ending of a life, globally. In India, last week, the Supreme Court, in a 
landmark decision, approved the withdrawal of life support, including artificial nutrition and 
hydration, for Harish Rana, who went into a persistent vegetative state (PVS) following a head injury 
over 12 years ago. Invoking the constitutional idea of dignity, the Court observed that it would not be 
compatible with temporarily keeping alive a terminally ill patient who is brain dead or in a PVS, only 
because it is possible to leverage technological advancements to do so. This forces a life of indignity: 
patients endure a slow, agonising death. As the end of life approaches, a loss of control over human 
faculties denudes life of its meaning, it added. The Court went on to expand the right to live with dignity 
under Article 21 to encompass the right to die with dignity. In India, in the absence of legislation on the 
subject, the courts have consistently had to engage with the euthanasia question over the years. The 
Smt. Gian Kaur vs The State Of Punjab (1996) case might have set off the trend, but the debate entered 
the public realm with the Aruna Shanbaug petition in 2011. The Court, in this instance, did not allow for 
euthanasia as the nurses caring for her demurred, but went on to lay down guidelines for withdrawing 
or the withholding of medical treatment or medical support to allow for natural death. In 2018, a Supreme 
Court Constitution Bench held that the right to die with dignity is a fundamental right. 
Besides benefitting Harish Rana in the instant case, the judgment will undoubtedly make it easy for 
terminally ill patients and their families 'to let go'. As technology advances in leaps and bounds, more 
life-preserving hacks will become available to all who are able to pay for them but could erode the 
patient's dignity. The judgment is intended to introduce compassion into end-of-life care for patients with 
unalterable medical conditions. The concept of a living will, a legal document empowering individuals to 
state their preferences for medical treatment in situations where they become incapacitated, vegetative 
or are unable to communicate, again endorsed by the Court, must also be popularised. In the grey 
zones, it is the law that can give people the courage to take the right call. 
T