Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 266

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Depletion 
A. acquisition 
2. Threshold 
B. expanding 
3. Widening 
C. benchmark 
4. Procurement 
D. exhaustion 
5. Rendering 
E. making 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- B 
4- A 
5- E 

            Trading smart: On the India-New Zealand FTA 
The India-NZ FTA shows how smaller deals can complement big-bang trade pacts 
The India-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (FTA), set to come into force on October 20, 
is a good example of why India is right in simultaneously pushing for trade deals with smaller 
trade partners along with the major global economies. On the face of it, it would be easy to 
dismiss the $1.1 billion of bilateral goods trade between the two countries as being less than 
1% of India's total goods trade. A doubling by 2030, as envisaged under the deal, is still a 
minuscule amount. Yet, trade is not simply a macroeconomic indicator. It is also a source of livelihood 
for lakhs of businesses, nearly half of which are micro, small, and medium enterprises. These exporters 
need all the help that they can get in the current trade environment. Adverse developments related to 
tariffs or the closure of trade routes can be mitigated to an extent by a nimble rerouting of trade to other 
countries where Indian exporters receive an advantage. With 100% U.S. tariffs looming and a trade deal 
with Washington remaining elusive, India needs to open up as many alternative channels for its 
exporters as possible. The New Zealand FTA delivers - India has managed to receive duty-free access 
on 100% of its exports, a historic concession. India has a good mix of capital- and labour-intensive 
exports to New Zealand that stand to benefit. Textiles make up about 14% of India's exports, while pearls 
and semi-precious stones constitute another 5% or so. On the capital-intensive side, one-third of India's 
exports are pharmaceuticals, parts of nuclear reactors, vehicular parts, mineral fuels, electrical 
machinery, and iron and steel. 
India has also done well in its handling of sensitive sectors. While the opening up of India's dairy sector 
was a major demand by the New Zealand negotiators, India held firm and excluded it from the deal. In 
total, nearly 30% of India's import lines have been kept outside the tariff concessions. On labour mobility, 
India has won some valuable concessions on visas for workers and students. At a time when several 
western countries are clamping down on foreign worker inflows, such alternative routes provide relief. 
India has also extracted a commitment from New Zealand to facilitate investments of $20 billion in India 
over 15 years, smaller but along the same lines as in the agreement with the EFTA bloc. India needs 
foreign investment not just for its economic growth but also to manage its balance of payments. This FTA 
is a good blueprint on how India can use its growing international heft to negotiate overwhelmingly in 
its favour. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Contemporary 
A. rough 
2. Steerable 
B. principle 
3. Esteem 
C. modern 
4. Doctrine 
D. directional 
5. Coarse 
E. respect 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Water wealth: On groundwater exploitation in Punjab 
Groundwater exploitation in Punjab disincentivises small farmers 
hat Punjab is over-extracting groundwater is not news. According to the 2025-26 Dynamic 
Groundwater Assessment, its groundwater extraction rate was 152%. While interventions 
reduced the number of 'over-exploited' blocks by five over the last two assessments, 72% of 
its 153 blocks are in the 'red zone', the highest among States. The principal consumer is 
irrigation for rice and wheat, amounting to nearly 25 billion cubic metres a year in the latest 
estimate. Data also show that the fraction of observation wells with water below 40 metres in the post-
monsoon period grew by two percentage points between 2022 and 2025. What began as a strategy to 
improve food security eventually yielded a concentrated rice-wheat cropping system, in which assured 
procurement, subsidised electricity and access to groundwater made high-yield varieties, intensive 
irrigation and fertilizer use and mechanisation less risky than alternative modes of cultivation. In the 
same vein, the reluctance of the region's farmers to pursue other crops due to uncertainties in storage 
options, prices, processing infrastructure, and supply chains has gone relatively unaddressed. But as the 
water crisis persists, the wealth gap among farmers is also widening. A recent study in the Economic 
and Political Weekly noted that while farmers with marginal landholdings use water more efficiently, 
wealthier farmers are better equipped to access lower water tables as well as draw higher volumes. So, 
as the water table drops, those unable to afford the requisite tube wells are forced to buy water, 
transferring their wealth to larger landowners and creating unregulated dependencies. A different study 
by two members of the same team, published in Discover Sustainability, reported that in Sangrur and 
Barnala, larger farms earned higher returns but recorded lower groundwater productivity vis-à-vis 
paddy, than smaller farms. Effectively, groundwater depletion raises the capital required for irrigation, 
which systematically privileges those farmers with better access to finance. 
State governments continue to attempt to address the demand pressure in multiple ways even as the 
scale continues to overwhelm the resulting gains in efficiency. At this juncture, together with those 
efforts, the State should also endeavour to protect farmers' incomes and access to irrigation while 
rendering the cost of additional extraction prohibitive. The 'Pani Bachao, Paisa Kamao' scheme, in 
which farmers are entitled to cash for every unused kilowatt-hour (for pumping) under a threshold, is 
already promising, albeit with low enrolment. Broadly, the State should use part of the electricity subsidy 
bill to directly support smallholder farmers, help collectivise irrigation infrastructure, and/or support 
farmers' transition to other crops. When benefits follow the cultivator, including tenants, rather than 
owners of the land or pumps, welfare can subsidise access to water rather than groundwater extraction. 
T