Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 155

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Grandiosity 
A. intervention 
2. Wound 
B. agreement 
3. Rebel 
C. injury 
4. Mediation 
D. magnificence 
5. Accord 
E. insurgent 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- E 
4- A 
5- B 

            Chaos foretold: on the Indigo crisis, air safety 
Indigo seems to have wilfully misread the plan for changes to crew duty hours 
ontrolled flight into aviation chaos' is an apt phrase to describe what Indigo, India's 
largest private airline, caused since last week during peak travel season, the golden 
month of December. The widespread disruption, which continues in the domestic 
sector, saw a spectrum of passenger distress - social, holiday and business plans 
disrupted, medical patients in anguish, senior citizens in agony and even defence 
personnel posted at the Siachen Glacier left stranded midway while rushing home, in south India, for a 
10-day break. There are many more untold stories at airports across India. Interestingly, the airline's 
international flights were estimated to be less than 10% of the cancellations, as they ensure a higher 
revenue flow but also tough passenger compensation rules. The carrier's official explanation was 
'unforeseen operational challenges', from technology glitches, schedule changes, weather conditions, 
and the implementation of updated crew rostering rules (Flight Duty Time Limitations, or FDTL). At the 
heart of the issue was the airline's baffling misreading of the last reason cited - of the two-phase plan 
by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) to regulate flight crew duty hours, in alignment with 
global safe practices. These include an increase in the mandatory weekly rest period for pilots from 36 
hours to 48 hours, a weekly cap on landings between midnight and early morning from six to two, 
restricted pilot flying hours on flights extending into night hours, and personal leave not being counted in 
the 48-hour weekly rest period. The regulations, initially proposed in early 2024, had a final 
implementation date set from November 1, 2025. 
With the issue finding resonance in Parliament, there were appeals made to the airline's management to 
restore services. DGCA data shows the airline having disproportionately increased its domestic flights 
from 14,158 in summer to 15,014 in the winter schedule against an availability of 4,551 Airbus flight deck 
crew. Even though responses have been sought from and directives issued to the airline, in addition to 
fare caps introduced for other airlines, the meltdown has only raised a core point - why the aviation 
market, largely a private airline-run duopoly, was allowed to slide into disorder as seen in the Ministry's 
responses much after the upheaval. With temporary waivers in the FDTL having been granted to the 
airline as a one-time measure to help it restore its schedules, pilot bodies are right in flagging what they 
term as a dilution of safety measures and crew welfare. The lessons are clear: the Indian air passenger 
deserves better compensation and rights. And the regulator must ensure stringent monitoring, without 
fear or favour, of every airline, big or small. 
'C


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Impersonate 
A. appeal to 
2. Transcend 
B. strong 
3. Invoke 
C. scammer 
4. Robust 
D. imitate 
5. fraudster 
E. surpass 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- C 

            Deal without peace: On the U.S. and Congo-Rwanda accord 
Trump's announcement of the accord between the Congo and Rwanda is 
premature 
resident Donald Trump counts the crisis in Congo as among the conflicts he has helped 
resolve. On December 4, he hosted the leaders of Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of 
Congo in Washington for the signing of a formal peace agreement, which endorsed an earlier 
deal concluded by the Foreign Ministers of both countries. Mr. Trump hailed the accord as a 
"historic" step towards bringing prosperity to Africa, while Congolese President Félix 
Tshisekedi and his Rwandan counterpart Paul Kagame, who had frequently exchanged insults, praised 
This mediation. Mr. Trump also promised American investments in the resource-rich Congo if peace 
holds. On Thursday, he said he would send "our biggest and greatest companies over to the two 
countries", adding that "we are going to take some of the rare earth, take out some of the assets and pay 
... and everybody is going to make a lot of money". But beyond the grandiosity of the ceremony, the 
situation remains complex and violent, with fighting continuing to rage in eastern Congo between 
Congolese forces and the M23 rebels. Under the agreement, Rwanda wants Congo to disarm the Hutu 
militias operating from its territory, while Congo wants Rwanda to withdraw troops from the east. 
Ultimately, however, the success of the deal hinges on securing peace between the Congolese 
government and M23. 
The crisis in Congo can be traced back to the 1994 Rwandan genocide in which about 8,00,000 people, 
mostly Tutsis, were massacred by ethnic Hutu militias. After the genocidal regime in Kigali fell, 
thousands of Hutus fled to Congo in the mid-1990s. Rwanda now claims that some of the militias that 
took part in the genocide continue to operate from Congolese territory. M23, which takes its name from a 
failed peace agreement signed between a Tutsi-led rebel group and the Congolese government on 
March 23, 2009, says it is fighting to protect the rights of Congo's Tutsi ethnic minority. The Congo and 
UN experts say neighbouring Rwanda, ruled by a Tutsi-led government, is backing M23. In 2012, 
shortly after its formation, M23 seized much of Goma in eastern Congo, but withdrew when Rwanda 
came under international pressure. It started another rebellion in 2021, capturing Goma again and 
expanding its reach. Alongside the U.S.-brokered talks between the Congo and Rwanda, a parallel 
dialogue between M23 and Kinshasa, facilitated by Qatar, is also under way. Congo wants M23 to 
withdraw from the eastern regions it controls, but the rebels have shown little interest in doing so. Mr. 
Trump's declaration that he brought the war to an end appears premature, given the complexity of the 
P

            crisis. For peace, the wounds of the genocide must be healed, inter-racial relations between Hutus and 
Tutsis improved, non-state militias disarmed and ties between Rwanda and the Congo stabilised.