Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 263

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Tainted 
A. shameful 
2. Spike 
B. polluted 
3. Embarrassing 
C. honored 
4. Menace 
D. danger 
5. Prestigious 
E. surge 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- A 
4- D 
5- C 

            AI cooperation: On Artificial Intelligence at a crossroads 
The BRICS framework is an alternative to a geopolitical view of AI development 
rtificial Intelligence is at a strange crossroads, with the United States government 
disregarding frontier AI developers' own call for a global development slowdown of models 
due to hacking risks and misalignment and the BRICS Summit offering an alternative view 
of how geopolitics should respond to this rapidly evolving situation. The Al firms and the 
U.S. government have long framed the astronomical sums being funnelled into data 
centres and other associated investments as key to holding their ground in a U.S.-China competition. 
During the Summit, Prime Minister Narendra Modi warned against the "weaponisation" of technology and 
minerals, while Chinese President Xi Jinping touted the potential of a "BRICS AI open source 
community" that would challenge any one country's dominance in the sector. India has taken the middle 
path, not joining any protest against U.S.-led models, while underscoring the need to keep AI 
development insulated from national rivalries. While some of this approach is informed by the fact that 
India's AI ecosystem is relatively fledgling, it is also a nod to the reality that this is a technology that 
may radically reshape the global economy, and participating even in its deployment may have dividends 
across time. 
And yet, the Global South finds itself wedged occasionally in great power rivalry dynamics, for instance 
suffering from a global pull out of Anthropic's powerful Fable and Mythos models. A world of trade 
disputes spilling into supply chains cannot and should not impact the proliferation of Al capabilities, as 
timely and comprehensive access to these technologies is key to national security. It is encouraging 
that the BRICS Summit's joint initiatives on AI are building more avenues for cooperation among middle 
powers to combat this concentration. Open source and collaborative approaches can insulate nations 
from belligerent and unpredictable policymaking on Al from the U.S. While such models lag behind in 
capabilities from the frontier proprietary ones, they continue to improve at a rapid clip, a heartening 
prospect for deployment-heavy economies where Al development is not at such an advanced stage. This 
is especially true as Al systems show signs of defying instructions and going to great lengths - even 
hacking into vulnerable systems to achieve a given task. The weaponisation of such capabilities, which 
can be supercharged or minimised depending on who is in control, raises concerns for countries with 
weakened cyber defences. Proliferation of defensive capabilities against such evolving risks is only 
possible when nations collaborate on making them broadly and cheaply available. BRICS should be 
one such forum. Al brings up the biggest known unknowns of history, and considering the dangers to 
A

            humanity therein, it should not fall into the geopolitics and hierarchies of haves and have-nots that guide 
the thinking of the hawks at the frontier.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Insulated  
A. promoted 
2. Wedged 
B. aggressive 
3. Proliferation 
C. stuck 
4. Touted 
D. protected 
5. Belligerent 
E. expansion 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- C 
3- E 
4- A 
5- B 

            Currency conundrum: On the BRICS New Delhi Declaration 
Boosting local currency trade in BRICS is not a simple choice for India 
The BRICS New Delhi Declaration shows that progress in enhancing local currency trade has 
been incremental. The paragraph pertaining to local currency trade acknowledges the efforts 
of various task forces and committees but falls short of offering any concrete proposals. 
Recently, the Commerce Ministry indicated that India's rupee trade with its BRICS partners 
was limited, with only the UAE and Russia engaged in it. Even those volumes are relatively small. Until 
recently, Russia had struggled to dispose of the rupees it was accumulating from its exports to India. 
Some avenues have now opened, with Russia being forced to import petroleum products from India due 
to Ukraine's attacks. But that is a trickle. Another option is to treat any BRICS currency as 'local'. India 
has already been using the UAE Dirham to pay for Russian oil. However, the latest Declaration's mention 
of promoting BRICS local currency trade "while respecting national priorities and acknowledging that 
there is no one-size-fits-all approach" is telling. Clearly, there are some intra-BRICS issues that need to 
be addressed. The deliberations are not public, but it would not be surprising if it was India that had 
emphasised national priorities and raised problems with a "one-size-fits-all" approach. Local currency 
trade involves several strategic considerations for India. 
On the one hand, India would prefer to continue being paid for its exports in dollars. A depreciating rupee 
ensures that every dollar paid to India results in a higher amount of rupees. As a country looking to boost 
exports, India would want to retain this advantage. On the other hand, India is also a major importer and 
would like to pay in relatively cheaper local currencies. It will eventually have to choose. Then there is 
the fact that China accounts for about two-thirds of all BRICS exports. BRICS local currency trade will 
largely be trade in the yuan. Relations with China might be thawing now, but India would still be loath to 
conduct its business in the yuan. It is also important to distinguish between local currency trade and a 
BRICS currency. While India has so far been cautiously supportive of the former, it has been vocal in 
opposing a BRICS currency, largely because of China's likely dominance of such a currency. Then there 
is U.S. President Donald Trump's threat of 100% tariffs on countries adopting a BRICS currency. India 
has displayed a pragmatic approach to dealing with Mr. Trump, and it will not court such tariff threats 
lightly. Countries such as Iran and Russia have pressing reasons to move away from the dollar. So far, 
India does not have a convincing enough one, and the New Delhi Declaration reflects that. 
T