Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 267

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Minuscule 
A. active 
2. Nimble 
B. momentous 
3. Historic 
C. anticipated 
4. Envisaged 
D. impending 
5. Looming 
E. tiny 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- A 
3- B 
4- C 
5- D 

            A nation's song: On Vande Mataram's rendition 
Vande Mataram's rendition must be in the spirit of "unity in diversity" 
atriotism is not just reverence for a territory or a flag but is the embodiment of solidarity 
with fellow citizens in a nation-state. The idea of a nation as a bond transcends family, 
community or faith, uniting citizens through common values and a pursuit of prosperity. 
National symbols and anthems exist to hone that bond. When they are changed or modified 
to compel citizens to accept a majoritarian version, their purpose is defeated. India's 
freedom fighting generation understood this. Which is why, in 1937, the Congress Working Committee 
resolved that only the first two stanzas of Bankim Chatterjee's Vande Mataram should be sung at 
national gatherings, since the later stanzas invoke the motherland as Hindu deities. When Jana Gana 
Mana was adopted as the National Anthem on January 24, 1950, India's first President Rajendra Prasad 
said that Vande Mataram, even though there is no mention of a "national song" in the Constitution, would 
be "honoured equally". Since then, the two-stanza version has allowed citizens of all faiths to partake in 
a song that stirred the freedom struggle and popularised by artistes such as Lata Mangeshkar and A.R. 
Rahman. 
In the last year or so, the BJP-led Union government has sought to unsettle this inclusive compact. 
Since the song's 150th anniversary in 2025, it has pushed for all six stanzas to be recited. The Ministry 
of Home Affairs (MHA) issued directions and circulars in 2026 and Parliament passed the Prevention of 
Insults to National Honour (Amendment) Act, 2026 with little debate- асtions that are in line with the 
BJP's habit of imposing uniformity and majoritarian preference on all citizens. The amendment extends 
Section 3 of the 1971 Act, which punishes anyone who intentionally prevents the singing of the National 
Anthem or disturbs an assembly engaged in such singing, to the National Song. Per se it does not 
compel anyone to sing or define the National Song or its stanzas. But read alongside the MНА orders, 
which prescribe an official version of all six stanzas, mandate mass singing at public functions, and place 
the song before the anthem, it amounts to compulsion, as a petition by T.M. Krishna in the Supreme 
Court has argued. The Court has rightly observed that the state may decide what the National Song is, 
but cannot penalise conscientious objectors in line with Bijoe Emmanuel (1986). This judgment held 
that no law obliges anyone to sing the Anthem, standing in respectful silence is no offence and 
executive instructions without statutory backing cannot curtail fundamental rights. The Court must apply 
Bi joe Emmanuel in full, set aside the MHA's orders and make it clear that silence cannot be read as 
"disturbance". By reverting to the vision of the freedom generation, the Court will do justice to the idea of 
unity in diversity. 
P


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Hone 
A. unity 
2. Stirred 
B. chanted 
3. Solidarity 
C. sharpen 
4. Recited 
D. force 
5. Compel 
E. inspired 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Overweight and weak: On the UN, the 81st session of the UN General Assembly 
The United Nations is unwieldy, and needs to move away from superpower 
hegemony 
The 81st session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) could have been written 
off as just another year, with another set of speeches delivered on the global multilateral 
stage. However, this year, the UN's annual Summit has a unique sense of urgency. This is UN 
Secretary-General (UNSG) António Guterres's final session, after a tenure marked by a record 
number of global crises, conflicts, pandemics, climate disasters and the advent of a dangerous 
age of Artificial Intelligence. Not since the Second World War have there been so many conflicts; one 
study recorded more than 65 conflicts across 35 countries in 2025, the highest since 1946. Growing 
polarisation on every major issue, wars by global superpowers in violation of the UN charter, nuclear 
threats and the imposition of unilateral and illegitimate sanctions have weakened the UN, which at 81 
seems overweight, weak and unrepresentative of the world. This makes it an important year for the world 
to unite in favour of a strengthened and reformed UN while choosing the next UNSG to guide that 
process over the next decade. This is an important year for South Asia too, with the election of 
Bangladesh's Foreign Minister Khalilur Rahman as the President of the UNGA's 81st session; he will 
oversee the UNSG's selection. It was disappointing that the world's most powerful leaders and those at 
the heart of the conflicts in Ukraine, Gaza and the Persian Gulf failed to suggest solutions for the future. 
U.S. President Donald Trump spoke about the possible "annihilation" of Iran, and defended U.S. 
actions in Venezuela. Much to India's chagrin, he again claimed to have negotiated peace in conflicts 
including the 2025 India-Pakistan four-day war. Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian referred to the 
U.S. and Israel as "murderers, terrorists and assassins". The Russian President skipped the session, 
while the U.S. denied visas to the Palestinian delegation. An initiative led by the European Union and a 
few other countries, cosponsored by India, to build a Partnership for Multilateralism (P4M) beyond 
superpower hegemony is well-meaning, but was drowned out by the rancour at this year's UNGA. 
For India, this year was significant as the Narendra Modi government launched a campaign for a second 
two-year non-permanent term in the UN Security Council in 2028-29. It was therefore surprising that Mr. 
Modi decided to skip the UNGA speech this year, and the multilateral summits on the side-lines, fresh 
from his hosting of the Delhi BRICS Summit. India's voice, of a balancing power that speaks for a rules-
based international order based on the UN Charter, diplomacy and dialogue, is needed more than ever 
amidst the global warmongering. 
T