Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 211

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Prompted 
A. competitor 
2. Contender 
B. surpassed 
3. Disruption 
C. praiseworthy 
4. Outpaced 
D. triggered 
5. Commendable 
E. disturbance 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Unlearnt lessons: On India's inadequate strategic petroleum and gas reserves 
India's inadequate strategic petroleum and gas reserves stand exposed 
ast week, the Centre hiked retail petroleum product prices after a gap of four years. This was 
expected, since the government had been warning about high crude prices, and how public 
sector oil marketing companies (OMCs) had been bleeding heavily due to under-recoveries. It 
was also expected that this would happen after the results of the five Assembly elections. But 
the Prime Minister's appeal for austerity due to the drain on foreign exchange, the sharp 
depreciation of the rupee in recent months and the April's inflation prints point to a much deeper 
problem that India could have addressed decades earlier - the country's inadequate strategic petroleum 
and gas reserves. India did build out a strategic petroleum reserve (SPR) of about 36.7 million-39 
million barrels, a programme conceived following the post-1991 vulnerability and formalised in the 
early 2000s. But today, this covers about seven days of consumption demand at 5.5 million barrels per 
day (mbpd). Combined with inventories of OMCs and import cover, this amounts to more than 70 days of 
stock. But over the years, India has emerged as the world's third-largest automobile market after the 
U.S. and China, and a comparison with those nations reveals the scale of India's vulnerability. 
While the U.S. built its SPRs in the aftermath of the 1973 oil shock - which, at 714 million barrels, is 18 
times larger than India's - China's roughly 900 million barrels is even larger. The U.S. has about 400 
million barrels currently in its reserve system, providing it with roughly 20 days of consumption. The 
country has emerged as the world's largest oil producer in the past 10 years with an output of about 13 
mbpd and a commercial system wide inventory, pushing it above the 90 day-mark recommended by the 
International Energy Agency for reserves. The same applies to China, which is comparable with India as 
a more oil import-dependent nation. These numbers become even starker when compared with 
reserves for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and liquefied natural gas (LNG), where India is most 
exposed. India has about 1.4 lakh tonnes of LPG storage, while its daily consumption is about 80,000 
tonnes - more than half its reserve capacity. As for LNG, India largely relies on stocks at regasification 
facilities of Petronet LNG and BPCL, without any underground storage for a fuel vital to produce 
fertilizers. Both the U.S. and China have heavily invested in underground LNG storage. The EU was 
quick to adapt following the Russia-Ukraine war as it drew down its dependence on Russian gas. These 
reserves have enabled advanced economies to hedge against supply disruptions by relying on long-
term contracts at times of supply disruptions, cushioning them from spot market spikes. As for China, 
its defiance of American sanctions against Russian oil has paid off handsomely. India would have 
benefited too, had it maintained greater strategic autonomy. 
L


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Bruising 
A. unavoidable 
2. Detente 
B. significant 
3. Diluting 
C. brutal 
4. Substantial 
D. relaxation 
5. Inevitable 
E. weakening 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- B 
5- A 

            Diversification gains: On India and its export competitiveness 
India needs to improve export competitiveness in terms of cost and quality 
India's export performance in April 2026 has been commendable, underscoring the attempts by 
the government and industry to diversify in times of crisis. Despite the various trade disruptions, 
merchandise exports grew nearly 14% in April 2026 to $43.6 billion. Some of this, as even the 
Commerce Secretary has acknowledged, is due to the overall rise in prices. Another significant 
factor has been the increase in the number of markets served by Indian exporters. According to 
government data, at least 20 exporting sectors have added 17 or more new destinations in the last year. 
For example, handloom products are now exported to 29 more countries than in 2024-25. The additional 
exports thus generated are still small, but establishing these pathways is vital progress. The data also 
show that several of India's key export sectors engineering goods, petroleum products, electronic goods, 
drugs and pharmaceuticals, and organic and inorganic chemicals exported more in April 2026 than in the 
same month last year. This suggests resilience in these supply chains, and the establishment of new 
ones. Another test of the strength of India's export growth is to remove the effect of petroleum products 
and their inflated prices from the mix. Here, too, India has performed reasonably well. India's non-oil 
exports grew 9% in April 2026 to about $40 billion. Notably, India's merchandise export growth also 
outpaced the growth of its imports at 9.9%. 
That said, the impact of the West Asia crisis is clear. Exports to West Asia fell by 28% in April, following 
up on an even larger contraction in March. Imports from the region, too, fell about 32%. This is a vital 
trade link for India and gains in other regions are not yet enough to outweigh the losses here. Imports 
of the safe-haven asset gold jumped 82% in April, which is perhaps what prompted the Prime Minister 
to urge Indians to stop buying gold, and the government to hike the import duty. Another highlight of the 
data is the continued rise in the significance of the services sector. The share of services in total exports 
has risen to about 49% compared to 39% in 2014. Rather than a reason for complacency, this should 
make the government take note. Any loss of a competitive edge in IT services, especially, due to the 
rise of Artificial Intelligence, will be an increasingly costly loss to India. Overall, however, the 
government's push for diversification of export destinations including through concerted activity to seal 
various trade deals seems to be bearing fruit. Now, if only it could also improve export competitiveness 
in terms of cost, scale, and quality, India would really become a global contender. 
I