Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 177

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Hailed 
A. skill 
2. Fractious 
B. accuracy 
3. Invoked 
C. cited 
4. Precision 
D. quarrelsome 
5. Prowess 
E. applauded 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- C 
4- B 
5- A 

            Manufacturing woes: On non-fossil fuel capacity and PLI schemes 
Capital support alone will not add to battery cell manufacturing capacity 
India's quest to install 500 GW non-fossil fuel capacity by 2030 has found its primary industrial 
engine in the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) schemes. Buoyed by the momentum the scheme 
generated in telecom manufacturing, where the government pays out a predetermined sum only if 
companies achieve agreed sales targets annually, ministries expect the initiative to transform India 
from a net importer of green technology into a global manufacturing hub. Unlike telecom, however, 
the PLI for high-efficiency solar photovoltaics and advanced chemistry cell battery storage face daunting 
implementation challenges. While downstream module assembly is robust (achieving 56% of its specific 
target by mid-2025), the critical upstream segments remain a bottleneck. Polysilicon and wafer 
manufacturing, the most technology-intensive parts of the value chain, have only reached 14% and 
10% of their respective targets. This disparity highlights a persistent reliance on imported raw materials 
and specialised technical expertise, prompting the government to consider additional capital subsidies to 
de-risk these high-capex upstream projects. 
Similar woes stalk the scheme for battery manufacturing. The progress towards establishing 50 GWh of 
domestic battery cell production to fuel the electric vehicle revolution, with an outlay of ₹18,000 crore, 
has been sluggish. By late 2025, only about 2.8% (1.4 GWh) of the targeted capacity had been 
commissioned. The gap between policy ambition and ground reality in battery manufacturing stems 
from stringent domestic value addition requirements - mandating 25% within two years and 60% 
within five - and the immense technical barriers of "gigafactory" construction. To add to these are 
challenges such as not issuing visas to Chinese technical experts, who will be setting up several 
manufacturing facilities. The Indian government's expectation that mere capital support will substantially 
improve high-technology manufacturing is misplaced. The complex infrastructure required to make it 
at scale requires decades of research investment and workforce training. While mega corporates expect 
international technology transfers to accelerate the process, they are capital intensive and do not always 
translate to near-term gain. Several companies face steep fines for not delivering on their deadlines. A 
relook at provisions in the PLI scheme to prioritise expertise and technical know-how rather than the net 
worth of companies bidding for PLI contracts is necessary.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Misplaced 
A. inactive 
2. Disparity 
B. misguided 
3. Bottleneck 
C. intimidating 
4. Daunting 
D. obstruction 
5. Sluggish 
E. inequality 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- D 
4- C 
5- A 

            Mature and pragmatic: On India-EU FTA 
India did well to negotiate a fair deal with the European Union 
The free trade agreement (FTA) between India and the European Union (EU) is significant not 
just on account of the sizes of the economies involved, but also because it showcases Indian 
negotiators' skill and maturity when dealing with a powerful counterparty. India has managed 
to negotiate favourable terms in each of the previous eight FTAs of the last four years or so, 
but those were with much smaller economies or groupings. For context, the other eight FTAs 
together accounted for about 16% of India's total trade in 2024-25, while the EU itself accounted for 
nearly 12%. Under the latest deal, the EU will drop tariffs on 99.5% of the items that India exports, with 
most going down to zero immediately upon implementation. India has given tariff concessions on 97.5% 
of Europe's exports. Both sides did well to address issues that were previously intractable. India 
ensured that strategic agricultural sectors and dairy were excluded from the deal. The EU too managed 
to exclude several of its sensitive agricultural sectors. What stood out was how the two sides arrived at a 
workable solution on automobiles. It had been disagreements over auto and auto parts that had derailed 
negotiations in 2013. The quota-based system now arrived at not only protects India's domestic 
manufacturers at the lower end of the price band, but also provides a big opportunity for Europe's luxury 
carmakers. Similarly, the quota-based wine tariffs not only give French winemakers an opportunity - a 
fervent demand on their part - but also provide protections to India's burgeoning domestic industry. 
Such a mature and pragmatic approach to persistent hindrances is the way large economies must 
negotiate with each other. This is further illustrated by the mobility, defence, and technology agreements 
that were signed separately. 
That said, there are some concerns. India could not negotiate any concessions under the Carbon Border 
Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM). At the moment, this tariff applies to only six products, but is designed to 
include all industrial goods in some years. The upside is that CBAM applies to all countries equally, and 
India has done well to negotiate a deal wherein any concession granted to a third country would 
automatically apply to it as well. Second, if India is to attract foreign investors looking to take advantage 
of a cheaper export route to Europe, it will have to quickly implement reforms that encourage large-scale 
manufacturing. Finally, with the FTA document to be translated into 27 European languages before it can 
be cleared by each country and finally the European Parliament, actual implementation will likely take a 
while. India must push for as speedy a clearing process as possible. Otherwise, the gains so 
painstakingly bargained for will be too late to offset the U.S. tariff pain. 
T