Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 163

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Ratified 
A. movement 
2. Pact 
B. unlimited 
3. Entitlements 
C. approved 
4. Mobility 
D. agreement 
5. Uncapped 
E. rights 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- D 
3- E 
4- A 
5- B 
Magnetic moment: On India and rare earth elements 
India must not undermine green compliance in its clean energy transition 
It the end of 2025, rare earth elements sit in an awkward intersection between climate 
ambitions, industrial policy and geopolitics. They are not the most important minerals by 
volume in the clean energy economy but that has not stopped a small subset of them from 
becoming a gatekeeper for many of its important machines. The question today is not 
whether the world needs rare earths for its green transition but whether countries can build 
resilient and affordable supply chains without recreating the same environmental and 
governance problems in new places. The principal bottleneck is high-performance 
permanent magnets, especially neodymium-iron-boron magnets for EV motors and wind turbines. When 
supply falters, these elements, not all rare earths, pass the shock into economies. Likewise, countries 
can also announce new mines and still depend on others for chemical refining, which is to rare-earth 
elements what extraction is to crude oil, rather than mining itself. This structure is why China remains 
central to the supply chain even when deposits are found elsewhere. 
This explains India's late-2025 focus on magnets rather than just mining. The ₹7,280-croreschemeto 
establish an integrated manufacturing ecosystem for 6,000 tonnes of sintered rare earth permanent 
A 

            magnets a year signals that if India can make magnets domestically, it will reduce a high-impact import 
exposure and create a platform for downstream manufacturing in EVs, wind components and advanced 
electronics. However, significant challenges lie upstream of this chain. A major domestic source for rare 
earths is monazite-bearing beach sands, which in India lie alongside thorium and other minerals relevant 
to the nuclear programme. The sector is thus pushed closer to a punctilious governance regime 
requiring close coordination across regulators and public sector entities, and which has to treat waste 
management and community engagement as core industrial inputs. Second, while the National Critical 
Mineral Mission has assigned a large number of exploration projects through 2031 to the Geological 
Survey, it needs the state to also translate knowledge of deposits into separating and manufacturing 
capacity, which demands regulatory clarity, reliable public financing, and credible enforcement. Third, 
India needs to augment midstream capacity, 
including by making magnet production bankable through long-term offtake from EV and electronics 
firms, and investing in process innovation that reduces dependence on the most constrained elements. 
The next phaseof the green transition willreward countries that can scale supply chains, avoid 
undermining green compliance and distribute rather than concentrate risk. For India, that means 
turning policy and intent into industrial capacity, with environmental credibility baked in.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Constraint 
A. believable 
2. Punctilious 
B. increase 
3. Credible 
C. barrier 
4. Augment 
D. weakening 
5. Undermining 
E. careful 
Answer: 
1-C  
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Fragile attractiveness: on the latest FDI data and India 
India's best efforts to bring in investment can be upended by U.S. 
The latest foreign direct investment (FDI) data show how India's attractiveness as an 
investment destination is not yet cemented and remains fragile. Net FDI remained negative 
for the third consecutive month in October 2025, which means that more direct investment 
was taken out of India than invested in it. The timing reveals a lot. At the end of July, U.S. 
President Donald Trump revealed that he would be levying a 25% tariff on India. A week later, 
The raised this to 50%. That is when investment began to leave India. Prior to August, India's net FDI 
position in 2025-26 had been quite comfortable. In the April-July 2025 period, net FDI totalled $10.7 
billion, more than triple what it was in the same period of the previous year. However, in August 2025, 
investors pulled out $622 million more than they put in, followed by $1.7 billion in September, and $1.5 
billion in October. India's cumulative net FDI position in 2025-26 by the end of October 2025 had fallen 
to $6.2 billion. This is still nearly double what it was in April-October 2024, but the point is that the 
direction has changed. One defence of the FDI numbers has been that the net FDI figure looks poor 
because outflows are simply exceeding robust inflows. However, in both August and October, gross 
inflows themselves were lower on a year-on-year basis. This contrasts against an average growth rate of 
about 33% in April-July 2025. In addition, this financial year has shown that the increase in outflows has 
been driven by Indian companies looking to invest abroad. One way to look at this is with satisfaction - 
that Indian companies are increasingly becoming internationally competitive in scale and resources. 
However, with the Indian economy far from saturated in terms of supply, the question to be asked is why 
these companies are not investing here. This is not merely a shifting of profits abroad in the form of 
repatriation. It reveals a deeper issue. 
From the 2019 corporate tax rate cuts, to Production Linked Incentives, to trying to boost demand 
through income-tax and Goods and Services Tax cuts, the government has done a lot to encourage the 
private sector to invest. These were all welcomed by Indian and foreign corporations, who touted them 
as "structural reforms". Yet, it took just one episode of tariffs by one country to rock India's image as a 
good investment destination. Even the Reserve Bank of India said that uncertainty over the U.S. trade 
deal was pushing foreign portfolio investors to exit Indian equities. This goes to show that shiny 
headlines of 'fastest-growing', 'largest market', and 'third-fastest' do not cut much ice with investors. 
They work in fair weather, but are flimsy in the face of the slightest headwinds. Such claims need real 
structural reforms to bolster them. 
T