Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 172

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
COLUMN A 
COLUMN B 
1. SUBSTANTIVE 
A. PROMOTED 
2. CURTAIL 
B. EXCEEDED 
3. PITCHED 
C. SIGNIFICANT 
4. OVERSTEPPED 
D. CHAOS 
5. TURMOIL 
E. REDUCE 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 
Moving on: On India's Consumer Price Index and a new base year 
India is getting rid of an outdated dataset for measuring inflation 
The retail inflation figurefor December 2025 isthe final instalment of the current series of the 
Consumer Price Index (CPI), with a base year of 2012, before it is updated to a new base year 
and with new weightages. The CPI data this year have been particularly useful in highlighting 
the problems with relying on a dataset that has not been updated in more than a decade. The 
inflation figurefor December 2025 stoodat 1.33%. The factthat it was a three-month high 
ismerely a statistical curiosity since it was also the third lowest since the current series 
began. Overall, in the April-December 2025 period, inflation has averaged 1.7%, substantially 
lower than the 4.9% average in the same period of 2024. But it does not feel that way. Anecdotal 
evidence and hard data show that the inflationthat people are really experiencing isfar higher than what 
the official data show. For example, the government's own first advance estimatesfor GDP growth this 
year showthat it expects private consumption to grow slower than it did last year. If inflation had indeed 
eased to the degree that the official data suggest, surely consumption should have picked up. 
According to its latest edition of the Reserve Bank of India's inflation expectations survey from 
December, households perceived inflation to be 6.6% - a far cryfrom the official 1.33% - and felt that 
T 

            it would accelerate to 7.6% in three months and to 8% in a year. The feeling clearly is that not only are 
prices rising, but they are rising at a faster rate. Failing to capture this is where the official data let 
policymakers down. 
The most basic issuewith any inflation data isthat a single figure is expected to capture the variety of 
price changes that take place across the country. The national inflation number aggregates price levels 
and movements from districts in Kashmir to villages in Kerala and everywhere in between, for both urban 
and rural. Naturally it will lose nuances in the process. Further, while this is the natural peril of computing 
national statistics for a diverse country such as India, the outdated nature of the CPI makes matters 
significantly worse. The weightagesof the various sub-sectors in the index werebased on consumption 
patterns in 2012. People consume very differently now, especially because of various central and State 
subsidies being offered. Thankfully, on February 12, the government will release the January inflation 
data based on the new series of the CPI. This series will see the base year updated to 2024, and will 
incorporate new weights based on the Household Consumption Expenditure Survey 2023-24. It is an 
update sorely needed.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Accelerate 
A. combine 
2. Aggregate 
B. softened 
3. Eased 
C. danger 
4. Peril 
D. viewed 
5. perceived 
E. hasten 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- A 
3- B 
4- C 
5- D 

            On mute: On the U.S., geopolitical turmoil, India's response 
India's interests can be secured only by assertion of its strategic autonomy 
The new year has brought little change in the geopolitical turmoil unleashed by the Trump 
administration, beginning with the U.S.'s unlawful action in Venezuela, followed by its threats 
to carry out similar regime-changing operations in South America and stated plans to annex 
Greenland. The U.S. Congress is now expected to discuss a new law that mandates up to 
500% in tariffs on countries purchasing oil or uranium from Russia. The U.S. also stepped up 
its rhetoric against Iran for crackdowns against protesters, imposing more sanctions and threatening to 
attack it. In a social media post, Mr. Trump said that he would levy an additional 25% tariff on trade with 
any country doing business with Iran and the U.S. is pushing India to wind up operations at Chabahar 
port, where India has invested billions of dollars. In the face of such aggressive and unilateral actions, 
New Delhi's responses have been muted, when not weak. The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) has 
expressed "deep concern" over events in Venezuela, but did not mention the U.S.'s egregious action of 
kidnapping the Venezuelan President and his wife, nor did it refer to the violation of basic tenets of 
international law. No statement has been made on the threats against the other countries (Cuba and 
Colombia), presumably as they are not in India's immediate vicinity. On Iran, however, which is a close 
neighbour and has a historical relationship with India, the government's reaction has been the most 
puzzling. It has not commented on the street protests or the U.S.'s threats of strikes and tariffs. The 
MEA has, however, issued travel advisories for Iran and Israel and is preparing evacuation plans for 
Indian students in Iran. Government officials also say India will reduce its trade with Iran further from 
current low levels. 
The government's motivations in not naming the U.S. for its obvious overreach can be explained. After 
a tense year in ties and a failure to conclude the India-U.S. Bilateral Trade Agreement, there is some 
hope of some movement on relations soon. U.S. Ambassador to India Sergio Gor has painted an 
optimistic future for ties, beginning with the trade agreement and the inclusion of India in the U.S.'s high-
technology partnership 'Pax Silica' next month. Officials may argue that little can be gained by speaking 
up now and risking another downturn in ties. However, each new threat by the U.S. is hurting ordinary 
Indians and the Indian economy. Above all, India stands to lose economically, reputationally and in terms 
of its other relationships as well, in a year where it hopes to host the BRICS+ Summit. The Modi 
government's experience from 2019, when it gave up buying Iranian and Venezuelan oil under U.S. 
pressure should be a signal lesson - appeasement of a global power, however strong, cannot ensure 
India's interests, only an assertion of its strategic autonomy can do that. 
T