Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 230

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Curb 
A. unlawful 
2. Regime 
B. limited 
3. Illicit 
C. government 
4. Scarce 
D. increase 
5. Surge 
E. restrain 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- C 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Data doubts: On the latest IIP dataset 
The latest IIP dataset raises more questions than it answers 
India's latest industrial growth figures show that, contrary to global trends and overall perception, 
the country's industrial output is getting stronger. Notably, the data show a quick bounce-back in 
industrial performance after the initial hit from the West Asia crisis. However, the new data also 
raise some important concerns about the composition of the growth, the systems behind the 
recent data upgrades, and the need for further improvements. Growth in the Index of Industrial 
Production hit a five-month high of 5.1% in May 2026, up from the 4.9% growth seen in April, which itself 
was a substantial improvement over the performance in March - the first full month after the West Asia 
crisis began. Within this, the manufacturing sector grew at a relatively robust 5.5% in May, albeit slower 
than in April. One view is that this is due to a revival in domestic consumption, since the consumer 
durables and non-durables sectors also grew at multi-month highs. Consumer durables, especially, have 
done well in April and May. However, the contrary argument is that domestic demand is in fact not doing 
well, and it is export growth that is leading to higher production. This is bolstered by the fact that GST 
revenues from domestic transactions have grown slower over the last six months than in 2025-26 and 
the year before that. Merchandise exports, on the other hand, hit a four-year high in April followed by an 
all-time high in May. It would certainly be welcome if India's industry has global demand to fill, but the 
fact that more of this demand is not coming from within the country is a cause for concern. The economy 
is already hostage to world events. 
The May IIP data were also accompanied by a note from the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) stating that it had made a major change to the methodology for computing 
growth for some sectors. It had abandoned the Wholesale Price Index as its chosen deflator to estimate 
the value of production in favour of the new Producer Price Index. This is a more accurate approach. But 
it did not, however, answer why this change was implemented belatedly and not when the new series of 
data was introduced on June 1. It suggests an unusually unsystematic approach by MoSPI. The strong 
growth in the IIP also does not reconcile with the fact that the Index of Eight Core Sectors - a 
separate government measure of industrial growth - grew at its second-lowest rate in 21 months in 
May. The core sector index is still outdated while the other major indices have been recently updated, 
but such a discrepancy nevertheless raises questions about what exactly is being measured. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Bolstered 
A. mismatch 
2. Albeit 
B. supported 
3. Discrepancy 
C. significant 
4. Abandoned 
D. although 
5. Substantial 
E. discontinued 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- D 
3- A 
4- E 
5- C 

            Fixing the rot: On the subversion of public examinations and recruitment 
There seems a recurring pattern in the examination paper leaks across States 
orruption in public life is often linked to "malfeasance", the venality of government officials in 
high places taking bribes and misusing their positions to enrich themselves or their cronies. 
But a more corrosive variant that impinges upon public life includes the systematic 
subversion of public examinations and recruitment. This is because public examinations and 
teacher recruitment are pathways to creating skilled individuals in a rapidly modernising 
economy where jobs increasingly depend on skills and training. Corruption in these processes, which 
should ideally be done on merit, will erode India's ability to fully realise its demographic dividend. Be it 
the National Testing Agency having to re-conduct the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (NEET) for 
medical undergraduate aspirants, or, the postponement of the Maharashtra Teacher Eligibility Test just 
before its scheduled date (June 28), the malaise seems depressingly familiar. It is driven by a cottage 
industry that leaks papers through insider networks and targets the vast coaching ecosystem to rake in 
money from those seeking shortcuts to pass. In the Maharashtra case, the alleged kingpin - a Patna 
resident suspected of links to an Odisha paper leak scam in 2024 and even to the NEET scam - 
reportedly ran teams from Bihar and Haryana that sought to sell papers to coaching classes. 
Eerily, a similar template surfaces in scam after scam. In Gujarat, the alleged mastermind of the 2023 
junior-clerk recruitment exam leak was an employee at a Hyderabad press that printed the paper. In 
2024, in Jammu and Kashmir, a printing-press insider and security men were chargesheeted in the 2022 
services board exam leak case. In Rajasthan, the December 2022 teacher-recruitment paper was sold 
by a serving government teacher. The common element is the presence of insider networks that have 
worked out ways to scam the system. The vulnerability lies not only in how question papers are 
distributed, but also in how they are set, with the repeated involvement of a select group of experts - 
many are linked to the coaching ecosystem. This is why the ritual of hunting for "kingpins" and running 
performative investigations until public attention fades leaves the core problem untouched. Pertinent 
questions are rarely addressed. Is the paper set by the same closed pool of examiners each time? Are 
their antecedents and commercial links verified? Do the departments that run these exams scrutinise 
examiners for conflicts of interest? Lastly, even if the system undertakes such reforms, it would be 
incomplete without accountability. Education Ministers - at the Centre and States - must own these 
failures. When leaks recur as routinely as they now do, the Minister who presides over the system 
should not remain in the post. 
C