Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 196

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Expanding 
A. remote 
2. Distant 
B. stable 
3. Steady 
C. unnamed 
4. Deliberating 
D. enlarging 
5. Anonymous 
E. discussing 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- B 
4- E 
5- C 

            Arbitrary and opaque: On the Employees' Pension Scheme 2026 
EPFO has tweaked pension scheme rules without wide consultations 
The manner in which the Employees' Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO)'s Central Board of 
Trustees (CBT) approved the Employees' Pension Scheme (EPS) 2026, on March 2, 
replacing the EPS 1995 scheme, has raised serious transparency concerns. This affects 
approximately 5.4 crore contributing members and 82 lakh pensioners. Although the EPS and 
the Employees' Provident Fund and Employees' Deposit-Linked Insurance Schemes were 
designed as a corollary to the Code on Social Security, 2020 - which was abruptly notified in 
November 2025 along with three other Codes - neither the government nor the Labour Ministry had, 
until now, given any hint of the new schemes. The stakeholders were not consulted by the authorities. 
More than any other scheme, the EPS 1995, has over the past decade, dominated headlines due to 
litigation in various courts, including the Supreme Court of India. Over the past 12 years, certain 
features of the scheme were altered, to the detriment of employees. For instance, coverage of the 
Pension Scheme was limited to those earning up to ₹15,000 a month, instead of offering universal 
coverage as originally intended. The pensionable salary calculation changed from the average pay in 
the last 12 months to 60 months, substantially reducing the amount of eligible pension. The 
unrestricted option for pension on a higher pension was limited to those who had exercised the option 
within a year of the modified scheme that came into force on September 1, 2014. With the Supreme 
Court's intervention in 2022, the higher pension option was extended to post-2014 retirees as a special 
case. Unfortunately, pre-2014 retirees were left in the lurch as the unrealistic conditions set by the PF 
body made most of them ineligible for higher pension. 
In the new Pension Scheme approved by the CBT, the option provision has been removed as it is 
considered 'obsolete' for reflecting a narrow legal interpretation. Moreover, those hoping for an upward 
revision of the ₹15,000 PF contribution ceiling are disappointed, as no such indication has been given 
so far. Both the wage ceiling and the minimum pension of ₹1,000 were fixed over 11 years ago. The 
EPFO's overall approach seems to be aimed at reducing what authorities describe as the burden of 
pension commitment. With greater government funding and higher contributions from employers and 
willing employees, the EPFO can well meet pension challenges. A positive mindset along with 
empathy for pensioners and contributors is what is needed from the Union government and EPFO. A 
mere change of laws, regulations and procedures will not deliver the results desired by crores of 
members and lakhs of pensioners. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Corollary 
A. impractical 
2. Arbitrary 
B. consequence 
3. Unrealistic 
C. outdated 
4. Obsolete 
D. unclear 
5. Opaque 
E. random 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- D 

            Price pressures: On new series of Consumer Price Index, inflation 
India must find sources of sustainable energy to curb inflation 
The new series of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), the second data release of which was 
issued on Thursday, does not yet have enough historical data for robust comparisons, but 
does include enough information to provide clues about the future. Retail inflation in India 
quickened to a 10-month high of 3.2% in February 2026, largely driven by food inflation and 
precious metal prices. This rise is something that the government should take note of early, 
avoiding any complacency that might have crept in due to the low inflation levels of the last year or so. 
Food has a lower weight in the new series as compared to the old one, but is nevertheless a major driver 
of inflation with a 36.75% weight in the overall CPI. Inflation in food and beverages rose to 3.35% in 
February from 2.1% in the previous month, driven by quickening price levels in the meat, oils, and fruits 
and nuts categories. Notably, inflation in tomato prices stood at more than 45%. Thankfully, this was 
accompanied by a contraction in prices of the two other staples - onions and potatoes - by 28% and 
18%, respectively. A large part of the low inflation last year was due to a statistical base effect that is 
now gone. Looking ahead, there are various factors that could result in rapidly rising food inflation. The 
first is that climate scientists are predicting the return of the El Niño effect in the middle of the monsoon 
this year. A weak monsoon will naturally raise food prices. The second impact will depend on how long 
the conflict in West Asia continues. Sustained natural gas supply constraints will hurt fertilizer 
production, affecting food output and, eventually, prices. 
The other factor that has driven inflation up, and which will likely remain a major driver in the near 
future, is the price of gold and silver. Gold jewellery saw inflation rise to 48.2% in February from an 
already-blistering 46.8% in January. Inflation in silver jewellery stood at more than 160% in both 
January and February. With global uncertainty and anxiety skyrocketing, the demand for safe-haven 
precious metals is not going to let up any time soon. Rising oil prices and LPG and LNG shortages are 
already raising input prices for industry, which will eventually be passed on to consumers. The Reserve 
Bank of India's Monetary Policy Committee has a tough job in its next meeting in April. Inflation is being 
driven by supply constraints, so trying to reduce demand by raising interest rates will not only have a 
minimal impact on inflation but could also further hurt growth when fuel constraints are already impacting 
it. The onus lies with the government and its efforts to expedite alternative sources of fuel. 
T