Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 262

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Formidable 
A. unclear 
2. Ambiguous 
B. divided 
3. Reputation 
C. leaning 
4. Riven 
D. powerful 
5. Tilting 
E. image 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            A rising graph: On the doping culture in Indian sports 
Doping is now a deep-rooted culture in Indian sports 
It least 13 doping positives in the run-up to the recent Commonwealth Games and the 
upcoming Asian Games have again put India in an embarrassing spotlight. For a country 
that has been notoriously leading the global doping charts for three consecutive years, the 
spate of positive results across disciplines including athletics, weightlifting, wrestling, wushu 
and judo, has not only brought shame but has also robbed India of some berths in these 
prestigious events. The dope-tainted names have forced authorities to pull them out of the Aichi-
Nagoya Asian Games squad. More such names are expected to trickle out in the coming weeks. 
Lucrative cash incentives for Asian Games medallists are a major factor driving athletes and coaches 
to take shortcuts, risking their health and reputation, as well as the country's pride. While the spike in 
dope-positive results ahead of major multisport events is not new, the jump this time is a cause for 
concern. The matter getting raised during the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) work-shops in Delhi, 
the Athletics Integrity Unit (AIU) downgrading India due to an extremely high risk of doping, and an 
international agency recently conducting surprise tests in Bhubaneswar and Bengaluru indicate the 
seriousness of the issue. 
Even though National Sports Federations have been expressing concern, it cannot be said that they are 
strict to the core to curb the menace. Despite being seriously understaffed, the National Anti-Doping 
Agency (NADA), which shoulders the primary anti-doping responsibility in India, has significantly 
increased the number of tests and raids based on intelligence gathering. But it needs to do more in a 
vast and populous country to discourage doping. Besides, NADA needs to get out of the government's 
control to function truly independently in order to enhance its effectiveness. Proper implementation of 
the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Act, 2025, to give more powers to NADA and its allied bodies, is 
another requirement. With dope testing becoming costlier and NADA needing more staff, the government 
can bolster the fight against doping by increasing the overall budget allocation, which was reduced in 
the current budget. The other challenge is to cut the supply line, as India has become a hub for the trade 
in banned substances sourced from different countries. An Indian serving a jail term in Kenya for 
illegally importing performance-enhancing drugs stands as proof of this. As India prepares for the 2030 
Common-wealth Games and hopes to host the Olympics in the future, it needs to act resolutely to weed 
out a deep-rooted doping culture in Indian sports. 
A


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Consensus 
A. conspiring 
2. Plotting 
B. alliance 
3. Deliberation 
C. intimidating 
4. Coalition 
D. agreement 
5. Threatening 
E. discussion 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- C 

            Building consensus: On the 18th BRICS Summit, the New Delhi Declaration 
The 18th BRICS Summit pushed for changes in traditional power equations 
eaffirming the importance of reformed multilateralism in a world riven with unilateral 
actions by superpowers emerged as a binding theme of the 18th BRICS Summit and the 
New Delhi Declaration. The Summit's success could be measured by three main parameters 
the participation of members at the highest levels, the importance given to intra-BRICS trade 
cooperation mechanisms and the consensus achieved by Indian negotiators in forging a 
joint statement in a time of war. The government should be commended for ensuring that Iran and the 
UAE, two rivals in the West Asian conflict, used the occasion for their highest-level bilateral meeting 
since the war began. The New Delhi Declaration, which was issued despite scepticism about all the 
differences within the grouping, presented the BRICS as a formidable front in its 20th year. Among the 
BRICS members, the position of Saudi Arabia, which has yet to formally join the group, remains 
ambiguous, as Foreign Minister Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud arrived after the main session where the joint 
statement was adopted on Saturday. For the other members, however, the consensus was clear on 
issues of global importance. The declaration made a call for the reform of the Security Council and 
support for a greater role for Brazil and India while recommending new initiatives for global governance. 
It condemned western sanctions and tariffs and resolved to improve intra-BRICS trade and transact 
more in local currencies. It also condemned unilateral wars, without criticising any member. While the 
statement omitted references to the U.S.-Israel attacks on Iran, the assassination of Iran's Supreme 
Leader Ali Khamenei, and of Iran's retaliatory attacks on its neighbours, especially the UAE, it is 
understood that this was due to a last-moment compromise effected between the two countries so as to 
forge the agreed text. It also took an exceptionally strong position on Israel's actions in Palestine and 
Lebanon. 
India's fourth BRICS chairship has given ballast to its reputation as a Global South balancer with easy 
access to both sides of a divided world, while delivering bilateral benefits. Prime Minister Narendra 
Modi's close attention to Iran's President Masoud Pezeshkian would have gone some way in assuaging 
hurt feelings, when New Delhi appeared to be tilting towards the U.S. and Israel in the war. Mr. Modi's 
meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping also afforded the two countries a chance to reaffirm their 
political will to normalise ties. And his meeting with important leaders from the ASEAN grouping and 
African nations paid much-needed attention to India's ties with them. This BRICS Summit will be 
remembered for a moment of solidarity among countries that have many differences but are together in 
desiring a shift in traditional power equations to one more driven by their emerging economies. 
R