Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 243

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Espouse 
A. hateful 
2. Odious 
B. troublesome 
3. Stifled 
C. support 
4. Inconvenient 
D. aggressive 
5. Hostile 
E. suppressed 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- D 

            Temporary respite: On the June 2026 data for the Index of Industrial Production 
June's strong industrial performance is not a sign of things to come 
The June 2026 data for the Index of Industrial Production has come as a pleasant surprise. 
The 23-month high growth rate of 7.3% of the overall index was unexpected given the 
significant economic headwinds from the West Asia crisis and a deficient monsoon. Some of 
the growth was due to a low base, since the performance last June was the worst in nearly a 
year, but the numbers nevertheless indicate resilience. [P] Dual push from the domestic [A]/ 
and the external sectors [B]/ the manufacturing sector [C]/ accelerated due to a [D].  Consumer durables 
growth remained above 7% for the second consecutive month, and the non-durables sector saw growth 
quicken to a six-month high. At the same time, data from the Commerce Ministry showed that 
merchandise exports grew 15.5% in June, revealing demand from abroad. The capital goods sector also 
saw double-digit growth. The sector has grown in double digits in eight out of the last 10 months. This 
bodes well for the economy, but also reveals some risks. Capital creation, primarily by the 
government, has been the single consistent engine of growth in the post-pandemic years. It needs to 
keep firing. There are too many uncertainties and headwinds for other engines such as exports and 
domestic consumption to consistently take up the load. Other areas of growth are also far too seasonal. 
The electricity sector grew at a 25-month high in June, largely in response to a heat wave in several 
parts of the country. The mining sector, too, snapped a four-month streak of contraction and grew in 
June. Yet, this will likely be temporary since the progressing monsoon will disrupt mining activities. 
Economists have also warned that the monsoon's deficiency will inevitably hit rural demand in the 
months ahead, which will see the consumer-facing sectors slumping again. Hopes of a ceasefire in 
West Asia are also evaporating. This is leading to considerable volatility in oil prices, which is sending 
ripples of uncertainty through the economy. This will play out over the coming months. Planned 
investments will remain pending, purchases will be deferred, and savings will increasingly overshadow 
consumption. The economy has displayed resilience so far, but this resilience will be strained as its 
duration increases. Further, people's needs are such that simple resilience will not suffice for long. If the 
external environment is going to remain unfavourable, the government will need to think radically about 
how to jumpstart the domestic economy. In the meantime, it will have to keep pumping money into 
capital expenditure even as other fiscal pressures mount. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Prominent 
A. encourage 
2. Curious 
B. confront 
3. Tackle 
C. notable 
4. Nudge 
D. coalition 
5. Consortium 
E. strange 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- B 
4- A 
5- D 

            Falling walls: On building collapses 
India's buildings need widespread rehabilitation work 
In September 2020, the Bhiwandi Municipal Corporation in Maharashtra placed the Kohinoor 
building on its 'danger' list around the same time the Jilani building collapsed a few kilometres 
away, killing 41. Six years on, and hours after officials declared the Kohinoor to be unsafe again 
and evacuated around 40 residents, it collapsed, killing 10. [M] The owners had refused, [A]/ the 
property and instead [B]/ to vacate or redevelop [C]/ in the half decade in between [D]/ undertook 
unauthorized repairs [E]. While the fall of the Jilani building, which was old but not on a 'dangerous' list, 
was a failure of anticipation, that of the Kohinoor building, on such a list and which fell mid-repairs, 
implies a failure of enforcement. Yet, the State responded similarly in both instances, by suspending 
officials in 2020 and filing a criminal case against the contractor now. Bhiwandi, one of India's largest 
powerloom hubs, has a large low-income migrant population living in small houses in densely packed 
neighbourhoods. With hundreds of buildings on the 'danger' list and no transit camps or temporary 
housing, residents often choose unsafe homes over homelessness, while owners continue collecting 
rent. Evacuation orders are also hard to enforce without police support, while allowing the corporation to 
claim that legal liability has been discharged on paper; demolitions are politically fraught. That both 
buildings collapsed during the monsoons is also not coincidental. 
India treats infrastructure as an asset with a one-time investment. The post-2000s construction boom 
only outpaced maintenance work and administrative oversight, with the latter having fragmented 
further since. In mid-2024, roofs/canopies collapsed at airports in Delhi, Jabalpur, and Rajkot while Bihar 
had a spate of collapsing bridges in 2024-26. Roads have frequently caved in and basements have 
flooded in tier-I cities, including in the Rajinder Nagar tragedy. This year, similar collapses have also 
been reported in Kolkata and Pune. Despite the availability of technologies to continuously monitor 
structures and issue early warnings, urbanisation has outrun municipal capacity, with most of the 
resulting failures involving a known hazard. The apparent rise in the frequency of these incidents 
indicates a lack of attention to construction quality as much as greater media coverage and there being 
more infrastructure to fail. But in place of the state's almost instinctive responses in the form of legal 
and disciplinary action, inquiries and promises of audits, and victim compensation, India's buildings 
need widespread rehabilitation work. Nothing short of an urban renewal would do. 
I