Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 186

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Pitched 
A. legal 
2. Precious 
B. presented 
3. Devolved 
C. valuable 
4. Mishmash 
D. transferred 
5. Legitimate 
E. hodgepodge 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- C 
3- D 
4- E 
5- A 

            Front and centre: On the front-of-package labelling issue 
Front-of-package labelling helps consumers to choose health foods 
In a further instalment of its continuing engagement with regulating processed food products, the 
Supreme Court of India has, once again, staked out for the right of citizens to health. In a recent 
judgment, a Bench directed the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to consider 
introducing mandatory front-of-package warning labels on packaged food products high in sugar, 
salt and saturated fat. Justices J.B. Pardiwala and K.V. Viswanathan directed the FSSAI to file its 
response to the proposal within four weeks. There is adequate evidence available to associate these 
sugar, salt and saturated fat additives in processed foods with non-communicable diseases, including 
diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular diseases, all of which are inching up their way up to 
epidemic proportions in India. The petitioner, the NGO 3S and Our Health Society, informed the Court 
that such disclosures would enable consumers to make informed decisions and choices and could help 
with stemming the tide of rising deaths due to diabetes and heart ailments. Earlier, in 2025, the Court 
had directed an expert committee under the FSSAI to submit its recommendations on the amendments 
required to be made to the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 2020, to 
implement front-of-package labelling. On the count of holding consultations with all stakeholders across 
the country, an extension was sought and secured, but in February 2026, the Bench expressed 
unhappiness at the regulator's compliance report, noting that the exercise undertaken thus far had 
failed to yield any "positive or good result". One of the elements of contention between the FSSAI and 
the petitioner was the former's proposal to introduce an Indian Nutrition Rating model, an indigenous 
system of rating a product; the latter opposed it on the grounds that this was not in line with globally 
accepted standards. 
The Court's persistent intervention on the issue of front-of-package labelling should lean on the 
massive ultra-processed food industry to implement these universally endorsed safeguards, to inform 
consumers of the content and additives in the packaged food, to guide choices, ultimately. Non-
communicable diseases have already swept through vast swathes of the population in the country: the 
2023 ICMR-INDIAB study found that 101 million people in India (11.4% of the population) have 
diabetes, with an additional 136 million suffering from prediabetes. Other concomitant factors including 
hypertension (35.5% national average), abdominal obesity (39.5%) and high cholesterol (24%) were also 
estimated to be high. Introducing front-of-package labelling is an essential part of establishing a 
continuum of care that begins with prevention. 
I


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Concomitant 
A. stopping 
2. Contention 
B. revelations 
3. Stemming 
C. associated 
4. Disclosures 
D. huge 
5. Massive 
E. dispute 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Troubled waters: On the Great Nicobar Project 
Concerns about the Nicobar project should have got a fair appraisal 
roponents of the controversial Great Nicobar Project will be enthused by an order from the 
Kolkata bench of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) ruling that all environmental safeguards 
are in place, that the potential impact of this gargantuan project on resident native 
populations of the region is duly accounted for, and the project's "strategic utility" is reason 
enough for the government to not be fully transparent with what it shares in the public 
domain. But the dominant narrative around the project mirrors the classic development versus 
environment conflict of a pristine Pandora being ravaged for the greed of far-away mainlanders. The 
Great Nicobar Island Project (GNIP) envisages a trans-shipment port, an international airport, township 
development, and a 450 Megavolt-Amperes (MVA) gas and solar-based power plant. In the early 20th 
century, the British Phosphate Commissioners (a joint venture of the U.K., Australia, and New Zealand) 
began large-scale phosphate mining for fertilizer on Nauru and Banaba in the Pacific Ocean. By 1945, 
the island had been so physically devastated by strip mining that it was deemed uninhabitable. The 
native Banabans were forcibly relocated to Rabi Island in Fiji, over 2,000 kilometres away. Today, 
Banaba is a desolate landscape of jagged limestone "pinnacles" and the displaced population is fighting 
for the rehabilitation of its homeland. These serve as historical precedents for why economic logic alone 
cannot dictate actions in remote territories. Though accorded an environment and preliminary forest 
clearance by the Union Environment Ministry, concerns about the potential loss of biodiversity, tree-
felling, and impact on resident tribes prompted the NGT to order a review of the environmental aspects 
of the project. 
Independent scientists and environmentalist groups have said that the felling of tracts of pristine tropical 
forest - nearly nine lakh trees across 130 sq.km - for this project would significantly harm the 
biodiversity of the region and constitute an irreparable loss. This is not counting the disturbance to 
leatherback turtle nesting grounds and the assault on the corals. There was also the contested matter 
of whether the community rights of the local Shompen and the Nicobarese tribes were fully settled under 
the requirements of the Forest Rights Act. Recently, members of the Tribal Council said they were being 
coerced to sign "surrender certificates" that implied their consent to large parts of their land being 
diverted for the project. The NGT order essentially rubber-stamps the government's appraisal process 
without independently examining the concerns raised. It only imposes faith that the government will be a 
conscientious executor of the project. Whether the Great Nicobar Project is a 'net good' can only be 
P

            judged by future generations, but the lack of a process that offers a fair appraisal of independent 
concerns bodes ill for the present.