Category: Editorial
Title: editorial part 233

VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Halt 
A. weakened 
2. Overwhelmed 
B. wetlands 
3. Undermined 
C. severe 
4. Intense 
D. pause 
5. Marshes 
E. inundated 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- B 

            Grand ambitions: On India's cooperative sector 
India's cooperative sector can serve as a worker-centric model of development 
ypercompetitive business models that dominate the economic lives of people have 
undesirable social consequences. The cooperative model offers an alternative, albeit with 
its own imperfections. India's Ministry of Cooperation, which completed five years on July 
6, is a bold experiment in harnessing the potential of this approach. [P] Traditionally 
confined largely to agriculture, [A] cooperatives now have the [B] opportunity and a [C] 
requirement to expand into other sectors, particularly [D] services. Cooperatives, by their very 
character, are relatively small-scale and fragmented; organising them, and connecting them to the 
broader economy that disproportionately rewards hyper-scalers is a balancing intervention - an 
economic, political and social imperative. The Ministry aims to transform the cooperative landscape by 
bringing policy coherence across agriculture, dairy, fisheries, banking, housing, consumer cooperatives, 
and exports. This requires collaboration with States and national federations, capacity building, wise 
use of digital technology, and market linkages. Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) are the 
foundation of rural cooperatives. Through a reformed legal framework, they have been empowered to 
undertake over 25 business activities, transforming them into multifaceted institutions delivering many 
economic services in rural India. 
The Ministry has facilitated new national-level multi-State cooperative societies, expanding market 
access for members and strengthening cooperative value chains from production to global markets. 
Cooperative enterprises are being encouraged to grow and compete, and a National Cooperation Policy 
is in the making. But there are challenges amid the opportunities. Corruption and inefficiency eroded the 
potential of India's cooperative sector, and the fear of local communities and States losing control of 
cooperatives to a national-level mechanism needs to be assuaged. The task is in finding the sweet spot 
of consolidation and decentralisation; localisation and nationalisation; technology and human labour, 
for boosting the sector. Union Home Minister Amit Shah, who holds the portfolio, is pushing the 
cooperative sector to expand into production and marketing, beyond agricultural credit and input 
facilitation, which could help mitigate the sector's endemic crisis. A well-coordinated, yet federated, 
cooperative sector can offset the social, environmental and political costs of global capitalism, which is 
the default model of the economy. Government and business leaders worldwide are viewing 
cooperatives with renewed interest, as the pitfalls of hypercapitalism become pronounced. India can 
develop its cooperative sector as a global model. 
H


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Assuaged 
A. united 
2. Fragmented 
B. divided 
3. Confined 
C. enabled 
4. Federated 
D. soothed 
5. Facilitated 
E. limited 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- B 
3- E 
4- A 
5- C 

            Checkbox caste: On the counting of caste, Census 2027 
An open-ended method of counting caste may not yield usable data 
The rehearsal for the second phase of Census 2027, under way in 16 States and Union 
Territories since July 6, carries a key feature: an "open column" where respondents can 
state their caste, which the enumerator will record. Unlike the 2011 Socio-Economic and 
Caste Census (SECC), which also had this feature, this counting of caste in the Census itself 
has statutory backing. The pre-test ends on July 20, and the government says that it will then 
finalise the methodology for counting caste. The hope is that the pre-test findings will corroborate what 
is known: an open-ended response on caste yields only unwieldy data, as seen in the 2011 SECC, 
which eventually proved unusable. It is not difficult to understand why. The method led the 2011 SECC 
to return more than 46 lakh "caste names", against the 4,147 in the 1931 Census, the last to tabulate 
caste. Respondents entered surnames, sub-castes and clan names as if interchangeable, inflating the 
count into incoherence. The Centre told the Supreme Court in 2021 that the SECC figures were too 
error-ridden to be relied upon for reservation. The pre-test should instead point to a better method - 
using the digital Census's hand-held devices, pre-loaded with a curated list of castes and sub-castes, so 
that the enumerator selects the 'correct' entry after asking the respondent. Mistakes and mismatches will 
happen, but as the 2022-23 Bihar caste survey revealed, this method could return more usable data. 
Unlike the other identities - linguistic, religious and gender - that the Census notes, caste is an 
abstract, irrational one that designates people not by biological, physical, or professed attributes, but by 
a perceived, primordial identity conferred at birth and arranged in a hierarchy. Even this hierarchy is 
not self-evident, with the perceptions of social status of different castes often contradicting one another. 
India's Constitution, committed to social justice, set itself against caste by abolishing untouchability, 
forbidding caste-based discrimination and holding out the promise of a republic where birth would not 
determine a citizen's standing. So why count caste when the very act of enumeration can ossify or reify 
this abstract identity? The only rationale is that self-perceived or imposed caste identity creates social 
inequities, and welfare and social justice measures that address caste-based injustice can, over time, be 
expected to delegitimise the casteism rather than entrench it. Through sharper targeting of welfare and 
affirmative action, empirical caste data can also inform questions of the creamy layer and the sub-
categorisation of castes and classes already benefiting from reservation. In these, better data are 
indispensable. If caste is to be counted, it should be counted well. The open-ended way of registering 
it will not serve the intended purpose. 
T