Category: Editorial
Title: Education reform the answer to AI jobs threat

Education reform, the answer to AI jobs threat

The government and educational institutions must join hands with reskilling and policy support to meet the AI challenge Indian IT stocks have fallen of late, on fears that large language model agents such as those developed by Anthropic can automate chunks of work currently outsourced to Indian IT services. India is already facing a problem with jobs and growth in real wage rates. Real wages for salaried jobs in India have experienced stagnation or decline in recent years, with data up to mid-2024 showing they were 1.7 per cent lower than pre-pandemic 2019 levels.

While nominal wages have increased, high inflation has eroded purchasing power, causing negative real wage growth in 2020-21 and uneven recovery since (PLFS). Indian IT companies are already laying off workers, with over 50,000 employees at risk of losing their jobs this year. The top six IT companies added just 3,847 employees in Q1 of FY26, a 72 per cent drop from Q4FY25.

IT worries This is bad news, as around 80 per cent of India's 50 million white-collar workers belong to the IT sector, which indirectly supports the livelihoods of another 250 million blue-collar workers such as drivers, security guards, and domestic help, with the implication of further worsening their economic conditions. According to a report from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, among college graduates aged 22-27, computer science and computer engineering majors are facing some of the highest unemployment rates, ranging between 6.1 per cent and 7.5 per cent, respectively. That is more than double the unemployment rate among recent biology and art history graduates, which is just around 3 per cent.

In an ironic twist, job applicants leverage AI tools such as Simplify to mass-customize their resumes and applications, only to have companies use similar AI technology to automatically screen them out. Human dimension The silver lining is AI cannot be a perfect substitute for human workers. Humans and AI make decisions differently, and these differences create powerful complementarities rather than pure competition.

Humans excel at contextual understanding and intuitive judgment. They can make sense of ambiguous situations, use experience-based knowledge, and adapt quickly when circumstances change. Much of this "implicit knowledge" comes from hands-on experience and is difficult to codify. AI, on the other hand, thrives in environments rich with data.

By processing vast amounts of information, AI can detect subtle patterns that humans might miss. It is highly consistent and does not suffer from fatigue or cognitive overload. And because it scales at low cost, AI can perform millions of decisions rapidly. Yet AI also has weaknesses: it requires large, high quality datasets to function effectively, and it struggles in unfamiliar or novel situations where historical data is limited.

The government and the educational ecosystem in India need to gear up for this change before AI starts transforming itself from being "task" specific to the whole job itself. Unfortunately, that does not appear to be the case. For example, there has been a cut in revenue expenditure of ₹6,701 crore in the education sector in the 2025-26 Budget.

Indian IT companies are also not keeping up with the required investment needed for the AI lead innovation. India spends only 0.6 per cent of GDP, against 3.75 per cent of GDP spent by China on R&D. Govt support There is a need for government intervention by combining reskilling, sector-specific support, and pro-employment policies, rather than trying to stop automation.

A clear direction should be given to educational institutions to design curricula suited to producing STEM graduates, and to incentivize NIRF rankings on the basis of how well universities adapt to that goal. As in the case of the UK, the government could also provide direct subsidies to students enrolling in AI-related courses or pursuing a PhD. India should upgrade its workforce with AI, not allow replacement by it.

Otherwise, India will slowly be transforming into a gig economy where the labour market is increasingly characterised by the prevalence of short-term contracts, low skilled, and freelance work. By Nilanjan Banik & Pranjal Chandrakar The writers are with School of Management, Mahindra University
