Category: Editorial
Title: Elder care is not a silver mine Part One

Elder care is not a silver mine

The challenge is to harness opportunities from demographic transition with commitment to quality The fast-changing demographic structure in India is unleashing a host of changes. Both state policies and market action for the elderly are on the upswing: welfare, health care, hospitality, travel, lifestyle changes, and more. The new government in Kerala announced a dedicated department for the elderly, consolidating initiatives spread across departments/agencies and promising a Japanese-style old age care system.

However, much of the visible changes on the ground are autonomous responses from the markets. Specialised realty infrastructure for senior housing, facilities for geriatric health care, and specialised hospitality for senior-centric services are the most visible market-led ventures. Why is realty waking up to the reality of elder care in a big way?

According to the Worldometer World Population Clock, India's population in June is ticking up from 1.48 billion, 17.8% of the global population. The share of senior citizens, now about 12% as the national average, is expected to reach 15% by 2036 and 20.8% by 2050. That will be about 350 million people, larger than the US, the third most populous country.

India's total fertility rate (TFR) is declining fast, but states like Uttar Pradesh (UP) and Bihar are slow in this transition, so India's population will go up for at least another 30 years. Southern states like Kerala and Tamil Nadu, and more recently Andhra Pradesh, lead the ageing trend. By 2036, Kerala's elderly population is projected to reach 23%, followed by Tamil Nadu at 21%.

In most of the northern states, fertility rates remain well above the replacement-level TFR of 2.1. By 2036, the elderly will be only 12% of the population in UP and about 10% in Bihar. Policymakers, both at the Centre and states, are looking at these changing demographic dimensions, including their inter-regional variations, with trepidation.

What if the population becomes old before the country/state becomes rich or advanced? How to address the rising dependency ratio and funding issues for the ageing population, including inter-state fiscal transfers and many other related issues like delimitation? Some states have taken steps to address the demographic shifts, while a few are attempting a baby boom too.

However, the markets (for quality housing, services, and finance) have already endogenised the ageing realities of India's population as big opportunities. The elder care industry shows sharp contrasts in its growth trajectory. It is concentrated in Kerala and a few southern cities (Chennai, Coimbatore, Bengaluru, Mysuru), but is quickly rapidly to places like Pune and Dehradun.

Some estimates put senior living infrastructure requirement alone at about $35 billion by 2036, driven by specialised living facilities funded through private investment. Kerala is rapidly becoming "India's Florida", with the elderly, including many NRIs and a few foreigners, moving into upscale homes. Instead of viewing the demographic shift as a welfare burden, Kerala is flipping the script by transforming elder care into a high-value service sector.
