Category: Editorial
Title: Electoral roll purges raise constitutional Part Two

Electoral roll purges raise constitutional questions

It was expected that the Court would direct the Union government to announce the list of documents and submit an affidavit in this regard. Instead, the Court merely requested the ECI to consider whether the Aadhaar card could also be counted as a relevant document. The SIR has been conducted in the election-bound States, deviating from the law.

Section 21 in The Representation Of The People Act, 1950 says that the electoral roll shall be revised before each general election and before a by-election and also in any year as directed by the ECI. Apart from these the ECI can also undertake a special revision of the roll of a constituency or part of it for reasons to be recorded. Rule 25 of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 explains that the revision can be done summarily or intensively, which makes it clear that pre-election revision is summary in nature and the revision done in any year (when there is no election coming up) is intensive.

A combined reading of Section 21(2) of The Representation Of The People Act, 1950, and Rule 25 of the Registration of Electors Rules makes it clear that only a summary revision can be done before the general election or any by-election. The intensive revision can be done at any other time when elections are not due, the reason being that such a revision is very comprehensive and the voters' list needs to be prepared afresh. It is a very time-consuming exercise and cannot be done in such a hasty manner.

The SIR conducted by the ECI a couple of months before the Bihar election, and, thereafter, in Kerala, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal is thus a clear deviation from the law and past practice. In West Bengal, where the SIR exercise was absolutely chaotic, over 91 lakh voters have been removed from the voter list, many of whom have been placed in the category of "logical discrepancy". This categorisation of citizens is unknown to the election law.

The Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 lays out a detailed scheme for the preparation of the electoral roll. Besides, the ECI has issued detailed instructions, one of which is that the booth-level officers (BLOs) should distribute enumeration forms to all existing electors through house-to-house visits. Rule 8 clearly states that the occupants of dwelling houses shall furnish the information called for to the best of their ability.

This should mean that the ECI will have to accept the information that the occupants of the house have collected to the best of their ability. It makes no sense for the ECI to insist on obtaining information that, in the normal course, is not possible to procure, particularly for unlettered rural people in remote parts of the country. The fact that 64 lakh voters in Bihar and 91 lakh in West Bengal were removed from the voters' list amply demonstrates the deliberate non-adherence to this and other rules by the ECI.

An instance of violations The object of this hastily conducted SIR seems to be to remove millions of voters from the voters' list. Media reports suggest that much of these deletions have been done without giving those affected a hearing, which is a blatant denial of natural justice as well as a violation of statutory provisions. Free and fair elections cannot be ensured by deviating from or violating the statute.

The justice system in the country cannot permanently turn a blind eye to it. By P.D.T. Achary Former Secretary General, Lok Sabha
