Category: Editorial
Title: Enabling a modern and futureready labour Part Two

Enabling a modern and future-ready labour ecosystem

Preparing for the future of work India's workforce is diversifying, with the rapid growth of gig and platform-based employment, flexible working models and digital-enabled livelihoods. In this context, the Social Security Code's inclusion of gig and platform workers is timely. With the size of this workforce expected to grow from one crore in 2024- 25 to 2.35 crore by 2029-30, establishing a framework for social protection is a forward-looking measure that aligns with the changing nature of work.

The Codes also emphasise formalisation, which remains vital for long-term economic progress. Clearer rules, standardised definitions and transparent processes encourage more enterprises to enter the formal economy and help extend protections to a larger share of the workforce. A boost for women in the workforce Women's participation in the workforce has improved yet remains below its potential.

According to the International Labour Organization's India Employment Report 2024, India's female labour force participation rate stands at 32.8%. The Labour Codes help strengthen the enabling environment by reinforcing equal remuneration, enhancing maternity benefits and expanding social protection to unorganised, gig and platform workers. The OSH Code also allows women to work at night with their consent and has adequate safety arrangements, thereby widening opportunities across several sectors.

Together, these provisions support greater access and continuity of employment for women as the economy evolves. A modern labour framework must balance the need for worker protection with the requirements of a competitive business environment. The Labour Codes aim to provide this balance by offering clearer industrial relations norms and faster dispute resolution, while ensuring that workers have access to essential rights, safety and social security.

This balanced approach supports investment, promotes stability and helps strengthen India's position in global value chains. The next few days will be crucial as the implementation process for these Codes moves forward. It will be important for States to align with the minimum thresholds and guiding principles laid out in the Codes to ensure uniformity and clarity across the country.

After the Goods and Services Tax (GST) reforms, this represents one of the most significant structural reforms. This reform momentum should continue, supporting greater investments, and thereby contributing to higher employment generation in the country. Harsha Vardhan Agarwal is President, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)
