Category: Editorial
Title: Enabling a modern and futureready labour Part One

Enabling a modern and future-ready labour ecosystem

The Four Labour Codes will result in a modern labour regulatory system that supports the growing dynamism of the Indian economy November 21, 2025 will go down as a milestone in India's journey of Viksit Bharat - a day when the much awaited Four Labour Codes were made effective by the Government of India. India has taken a giant leap in labour rights with the implementation of four modernised Labour Codes (the Code on Wages, 2019, the Industrial Relations Code, 2020, the Code on Social Security, 2020 and the Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions (OSH) Code, 2020). These reforms create a fair, modern and future-ready labour ecosystem - one that empowers workers, enhances enterprise competitiveness and strengthens India's path towards a Viksit Bharat and Aatmanirbhar Bharat.

India's labour framework has evolved gradually over several decades, leading to the creation of multiple pieces of legislation operating across different time periods and economic contexts. While these laws have played an important role in shaping employment relations, the growing size and diversity of India's workforce brought to the fore the need for simplification and consolidation. The Second National Commission on Labour recommended grouping existing laws into broader functional codes.

Extensive consultations with industry, employers, trade unions and State governments between 2015 and 2019 led to these four comprehensive Labour Codes being enacted. A workforce that is both large and young India today has one of the world's largest and youngest workforces, with more than 643 million workers, and is expected to contribute nearly two-thirds of new global workforce entrants in the coming years, as in the World Economic Forum. Recent labour market trends point to a positive momentum: between 2017-18 and 2023-24, India created 16.83 crore jobs, the unemployment rate declined from 6% to 3.2%, and formal employment expanded significantly.

Given that a large share of India's workforce still remains in the informal sector, the need for a simplified and coherent labour framework has been particularly important to help extend protections and improve productivity of the unorganised sector. The coverage under the Code for Social Security has been extended to the unorganised sector also. These developments reflect the growing dynamism of the economy and emphasise the need for a modern labour regulatory system that supports this trajectory.

For workers, the Labour Codes provide a stronger and more consistent set of protections. Universal minimum wages, a national floor wage, mandatory appointment letters, timely payment of wages, and clear rules on working hours - including the 48-hour work week  -  reinforce fairness and security. The OSH Code's emphasis on safety committees, free preventive health check-ups and improved workplace standards strengthens the focus on well-being and productivity.

The Code on Social Security, 2020 provides for universal Employees' State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) coverage with no geographic restrictions, streamlined Employees' Provident Fund (EPF) procedures for quicker resolutions, and support for the construction sector through simplified cess payments. It also establishes a National Social Security Fund for various worker categories. Another major reform under these codes is the simplification of compliance requirements.

The shift to single registration, single licence and single return significantly reduces administrative burdens, particularly for micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME). A uniform definition of wages introduces clarity across multiple laws, helping reduce disputes and improving predictability in wage-related calculations. Decriminalisation of minor offences and the introduction of digital processes such as algorithm-based inspections encourage transparency and trust-based compliance.
