Category: Editorial
Title: Ethanol push can deepen water woes Part Two

Ethanol push can deepen water woes

Data from the Central Ground Water Board (2024) show that groundwater extraction is already at an alarming level in major agricultural States like Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, and Tamil Nadu. The long-term projections by the Central Water Commission and the National Commission for Integrated Water Resources Development (1999) state that India's total water demand will exceed supply before 2050. The NITI Aayog report on Composite Water Management Index (2018) has also underlined the severity of water scarcity in different regions.

By increasing the cultivation of water-intensive crops for ethanol, we will be emptying our aquifer storage much faster. Subsidised electricity for farming and guaranteed prices from distilleries will further encourage farmers to pump out groundwater for fuel crops. Plan carefully There is no doubt that ethanol blending will help the country's economy by saving huge foreign exchange.

But to prevent the ethanol mandate from creating a severe water crisis, we need careful, resource-centric planning. The policy should not be made by the energy ministry alone; it must be linked with the water resources and agriculture ministries. First, instead of using water-heavy crops like paddy and sugarcane, the government must diversify the crops used for ethanol.

Policy incentives must be given to low-water-consuming cereal crops (bajra, jowar, ragi) as they use only a fraction of the water that paddy or sugarcane consume. These can be grown on rainfed lands without draining groundwater. Second, in areas where sugarcane and maize are used for ethanol, modern water-saving micro-irrigation technologies must be made compulsory as they save about 40-50 per cent of water in crop cultivation while increasing crop productivity.

Government financial support, distillery licences and procurement prices must be linked strictly to the use of micro-irrigation. Similarly, distilleries must be forced to use Zero Liquid Discharge systems so that 100 per cent of the water used inside the factory is recycled and reused. To conclude, a fuel policy that reduces air pollution or import bills but leaves behind dried-up wells and parched agricultural lands is completely unsustainable.

By A Narayanamoorthy The writer is an Economist and former full-time Member (Official), Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices, New Delhi. Views expressed are personal
