Category: Editorial
Title: Euro works well yet Europe falters Part Two

Euro works well, yet Europe falters

From 1999-2008, Euro area countries fared well. The transition to euro was relatively smooth and macroeconomic conditions were stable. The members did violate the convergence criteria, especially in terms of high debt levels, but the risks were ignored. The 2008 recession followed by the 2010 European debt crisis exposed the high debt risks, leading to a major economic crisis.

The common monetary policy could not focus on the concerns of individual countries, while a common fiscal policy was absent. There was criticism about ignoring Mundell's criteria and also not adhering to their own macro criteria. After many policy trials and errors, Eurozone countries did recover but scars of the crises remain.

The woes of Eurozone (and larger Europe) have only gone worse after Brexit, Russia-Ukraine war, and Trump tariffs. Growth during 1999- 2007 for the US and Eurozone averaged 2.9% and 2.3% respectively. It has declined to average 2% in the US and 0.9% in Eurozone in 2008-25. The leading economy of Europe, Germany, has barely grown since 2019.

There are articles and research aplenty that argue how European growth rates and productivity have declined and stagnated over the years. The International Monetary Fund's June 2025 quarterly Finance and Development was devoted to reviving Europe. Two committees under former former Italian Prime Ministers Mario Draghi and Enrico Letta have provided a road map for a more competitive and productive Europe.

Europe's political economy has become highly divided with a rising anti-immigration sentiment which will make it even more difficult to achieve growth based on integration. Summing up, the paradox of a popular euro and a struggling Europe is an interesting one. The recent European Commission survey showed that 83% of Eurozone respondents favour the common currency.

Economic theory suggests that eventually a currency will reflect the fortunes of the economy. European policymakers need to urgently work towards reviving the European economy. Else they will lose the gains made by euro. By Amol Agrawal, the writer teaches at the National Institute of Securities Markets Views are personal
