Category: Editorial
Title: Euro works well yet Europe falters Part One

Euro works well, yet Europe falters

European policymakers need to urgently work towards reviving the European economy. Else they will lose the gains made by euro As the world ushers in a new year on January 1, 2026, Bulgarians will wake up with anxiety. The New Year shall kick-start a process of the European nation giving up its currency, lev, for the euro.

In 1999, the monetary world witnessed a grand experiment where 11 European nations united to give up their monetary policy to a common central bank and adopt a common currency. In 26 years, 10 more countries including Bulgaria have joined euro. This popularity of euro points to an interesting paradox: While the currency seems to be working, Europe is faltering.

How and why did select European countries adopt a common currency? To answer the question, we need to read monetary history. One major struggle for most economies has been to find an appropriate exchange rate system. Before the Second World War, economies fixed currencies to gold. In 1944, under the Bretton Woods (BW) agreement, countries decided to fix exchange rates against the US dollar which was fixed against gold.

In 1971, then US President Richard Nixon dismantled the BW system by delinking US dollar from gold. Most economies were used to being a part of some form of fixed exchange system; they had to now scamper for alternative choices. The pertinent debate was whether one should remain in a fixed exchange rate system or switch to a floating/flexible exchange rate system.

The pros of fixed exchange is its predictability and simplicity; the cons are that monetary policy becomes ineffective. The benefit of a flexible exchange is that monetary policy becomes effective; the drawback is its unpredictability. In 1961, economist Robert Mundell provided another idea that member countries can have a common currency and form an optimal currency area (OCA).

An OCA will lead to lower transaction costs and facilitate higher trade. His condition for OCA was the presence of high labour mobility in member nations. If there is a negative shock in one country, labour can move freely to a less impacted member nation. Later, researchers also added capital mobility and tax transfers as prior conditions.

The European countries, which had in any case formed an economic union for fostering trade post-World War II, decided to become an OCA by forming a monetary union. A common euro would also provide a platform to challenge the hegemony of the US dollar. They also formed a common central bank (European Central Bank) to frame monetary policy for the member economies.

However, to achieve OCA they followed a different strategy. As labour and capital mobility would take a long time, they came out with macroeconomic convergence criteria, hoping to achieve mobility over time. The convergence criteria had four components. First, price stability where the joining member country's average inflation should not exceed the inflation rate of the three best-performing EU member states by more than 1.5 percentage points.

Second, fiscal stability, where government deficit and debt does not exceed 3% and 60% of GDP respectively. The third and fourth components were that the stable exchange rates and long-term interest rate should not exceed those of the three best-performing member states in terms of price stability by more than 2 percentage points. While 11 major European countries joined the euro, other major economies such as the UK, Denmark, and Sweden opted out.
