Category: Editorial
Title: Explained The UAEs exit from OPEC and its Part One

Explained: The UAE's exit from OPEC, and its possible impact on global oil prices

OPEC, and its possible impact on global oil prices What influenced the UAE to leave an alliance it has been a part of for over 50 years, and what can the oil markets expect as a result? How might countries like India be impacted? We explain. The United Arab Emirates announced its exit from the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and the broader OPEC+ alliance on Tuesday (April 28), set to come into effect on May 1.

The UAE's state news agency cited Abu Dhabi's longer-term economic vision as the reason for the sudden exit, at a time when global oil markets have witnessed major shocks due to the US-Iran war. The war itself may have been an important trigger for the decision. What influenced the UAE to leave an alliance it has been a part of for over 50 years, and what can the markets expect as a result?

What is OPEC, and when did the UAE join the group? Founded in September 1960 at the Baghdad conference in Iraq, OPEC was originally established by five founding members, namely Iran, Kuwait, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Venezuela. Prior to its formation, Western multinational oil companies (often referred to as the Seven Sisters) largely dictated the prices paid to oil-producing nations.

Created to counter this dominance, OPEC's agenda was to coordinate the petroleum policies of its member states to ensure that they received stable returns for their products. The UAE formally joined the alliance in 1967, six years before the OPEC oil embargo was imposed on nations like the United States and the Netherlands due to their support of Israel in the Arab-Israeli war. With oil prices nearly quadrupling in this period as a result, OPEC steadily gained geopolitical leverage while extending membership to countries like Algeria and Nigeria.

In 2016, OPEC+, a wider alliance that onboarded 10 major non-OPEC producers (led by Russia) was created. A response to the US's booming shale oil production, OPEC+ produced roughly 40% of the world's crude oil and accounts for 60% of internationally traded petroleum, according to the US Energy Information Administration (EIA). OPEC's central role in global markets Undertaking a role resembling that of a central bank for the global oil market, OPEC's primary tool is its power over the supply management of oil.

OPEC attempts to manage oil prices by regulating production limits and setting strict quotas for each of its member countries. This means that a member state may or may not be able to hit its peak oil production capacity, depending on OPEC-assigned limits. Designed to protect the market from oversupply during times of reduced global demand, these quotas ensure members collectively pump less oil to prevent a crash in per-barrel pricing.

Conversely, it also affords them the luxury of increasing production during supply shortages, ensuring that prices do not skyrocket. Given these countries' heavy dependence on oil revenues, such mandates allow them to protect their domestic budgets from unforeseen shocks. Role of the Iran War The UAE's decision is likely intertwined with the security concerns in West Asia.

With the recent US-Iran war, Abu Dhabi's immediate oil-related concerns are centred around the Strait of Hormuz, which has seen the number of ships passing through reduced to a trickle. Responsible for roughly a fifth of the world's oil transport before the war, the conflict has also directly resulted in targeted attacks on the supply dynamics of Gulf oil countries, with oil refinement and production facilities damaged. More importantly, with Iran a founding member of OPEC, the alliance's consensus-based decision-making restricts the UAE's ability to secure its exports.
