Category: Editorial
Title: Explained Maharashtras new farm loan waiver Part One

Explained: Maharashtra's new farm loan waiver, despite past warnings of impact on credit culture  -  and farmers themselves

Loan waiver, despite past warnings of impact on credit culture - and farmers themselves Maharashtra is not an outlier, and the increasing trend of states issuing loan waivers has long-term implications, including for the farmers themselves. The Maharashtra government announced a Rs 35,000 crore waiver scheme last week, potentially impacting the state's credit culture and finances. It also comes despite past advisories issued by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and several working groups against the practice.

So far, the state has collected information about around 30 lakh farmers, including 20 lakh non-defaulters, which will impose a heavy burden on the state exchequer. The state has more than 1.6 crore farmers in total. The waiver for defaulters alone is estimated to cost about Rs 20,000 crore, while the incentive of Rs 50,000 promised to farmers who have been regularly repaying their loans will require another Rs 15,000 crore, taking the total outgo to roughly Rs 35,000 crore.

The state government maintains that its finances remain robust and it is prepared to absorb the fiscal burden of what it calls a necessary step to safeguard the interests of the farming community. However, Maharashtra is not an outlier, and the increasing trend of loan waivers has wider negative implications. Farm waivers so far After two nationwide waivers initiated by the Central government since 1990, farm loan waivers have seen an unprecedented increase since 2014-15, driven by announcements from state governments.

The policy of farm loan waivers is grounded in the rationale of alleviating the debt overhang of beneficiaries, thus enabling them to undertake productive investment and boost real economic activity. While the risk to farmers' income  -  nature's risk as well as market risk  -  can cause significant distress, loan waivers, which often occur around elections, are "not the panacea to address the underlying risks", according to the RBI. In reality, the practice can undermine the credit culture, adversely affect state finances, and harm farmers' interests in the medium to long term.

Central and state governments have spent a whopping Rs 3 lakh crore in the last 35 years towards various farm loan waiver schemes. Generally, incumbent state governments see such announcements as giving them an obvious political edge for elections. An RBI Report of the Internal Working Group to Review Agricultural Credit in 2019 pointed out that "The nationwide loan waiver programs of 1990 and 2008 were announced by the Union Government in the run-up to the parliamentary elections of 1991 and 2009, respectively.

Similarly, eight out of ten loan waiver announcements since 2014 were made within 90 days of their respective states' election results." Centre kicks off the exercise The first major programme on farm loan waiver, the Agriculture and Rural Debt Relief Scheme, 1990 (ARDRS), was undertaken nationwide in 1990, followed by another nationwide loan waiver in 2008, viz., Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme, 2008 (ADWDRS). The ARDRS programme, which came into force on May 15, 1990, covered short-term loans and overdue instalments of term loans outstanding to public sector banks (PSBs) and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) as on October 2, 1989. The maximum relief amount under the program was Rs 10,000 per farmer, and there was no differential treatment based on the size of their landholding.
