Category: Editorial
Title: Falling edifice On the Delhi private hostel

Falling edifice: On the Delhi private hostel building collapse

Delhi's ambition as an education hub is at odds with its civic infrastructure The collapse of a five-storey building in Delhi, being run as a private hostel that killed seven and injured five in a densely populated colony abutting Delhi University's South Campus, has brought to light the twin issues of haphazard development in the capital city's residential areas and the shortage of affordable housing for students. With over 70,000 students entering Delhi University every year and almost half of them needing accommodation on a student budget, the city has failed to keep up with the growing demand. The University has, for all practical purposes, absolved itself of the responsibility, citing lack of land, leaving private players to cash in and run paying guest accommodations or private hostels that are not regulated.

In a setup where every extra bed means more revenue, matchbox-sized rooms, often located in buildings that flout building bylaws and fire safety regulations and have no ventilation, are what several students call home. As soon as they arrive in the capital, students from many parts of the country realise that they are paying to live in the city not just in monetary terms but with their safety, security and sanity. The Delhi government says that it wants the city to be a national education hub and harness the soft power of its youth, but that will be not possible without addressing the need for affordable, safe student housing.

The Delhi government has suspended five senior officers of the civic body, ordered a probe and announced that it was working on introducing a stringent policy under which every building used for public activity would be required to undergo periodic structural audits and obtain safety certifications. It must go beyond these reactive measures to seek more durable solutions. In 2024, the basement of a coaching centre flooded due to heavy rains claiming the lives of three civil service aspirants.

After that incident as well, probes were ordered, basements were sealed and legal action was taken against owners but a larger systemic change remains elusive. The Centre and the Government of NCT must work together with educational institutions to develop more residential, travel and learning facilities for students. The introduction of four-year undergraduate programmes also means that students will stay on for an additional year, increasing the pressure on accommodation.

Private hostels can be part of the solution, but crumbling civic infrastructure, illegal construction and lack of safety audits must be tackled through policy and strict enforcement.
