Category: Editorial
Title: Farm loan waivers are just a band aid Part One

Farm loan waivers are just a band aid solution

To aid distressed farmers, the new TN govt and other States must ensure fair prices, adequate procurement and secure markets After the massive ₹36,585-crore farm loan waiver announced by the BJP-led government in Maharashtra in June, benefitting 56 lakh farmers, the newly formed Tamilaga Vettri Kazhagam (TVK)-led government in Tamil Nadu has announced a conditional farm loan waiver for cooperative bank borrowers in May. Aimed at fulfilling a electoral promise and helping Tamil Nadu's heavily indebted farmers, this initiative will provide some respite to small and marginal farmers. However, can a one-time debt relief solve deep-rooted farm issues faced by the farmers?

The scheme allocates ₹2,044.46 crore to benefit approximately 14.22 lakh farmers, but its eligibility criteria apply strictly to short-term crop loans availed through cooperative banks between May 1, 2025 and February 28, 2026. Rather than following a blanket write-off, the government has introduced an innovative Graded Relief system that gives the quantum of waiver based on outstanding loan amounts and farm-size classifications. Under this framework, marginal farmers holding debts up to ₹50,000 will receive a complete waiver, whereas small farmers within the same debt bracket are eligible only for a 50 per cent relief.

This policy design follows a progressive, variable economic logic where the rate of relief systematically decreases as the outstanding credit volume scales upward. Specifically, agricultural loans falling between the brackets of ₹50,001 and ₹60,000 receive a fixed waiver of ₹40,000. This benefit declines as the debt size increases.

Consequently, the large landholders and other categories of farmers with debts exceeding ₹1,00,000 will receive a waiver of just ₹5,000. Though the one-time debt write-offs are never a permanent panacea for systemic agrarian distress, the innovative use of an explicit graded scale used to fix the relief deserves due recognition. History of debt waivers There's a long history of farm loan waivers in India.

Citing droughts, monsoon failures and floods, various state governments have implemented small-scale relief schemes since 1987. However, driven by an alarming escalation in nationwide farm suicides and taking into account the grim findings of the Radhakrishna Committee Report on Indebtedness (2006), the Centre launched a massive nationwide Agricultural Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme in 2008. This scheme wrote off nearly ₹60,000 crore, covering about 3.7 crore small and marginal farmers and 60 lakh other farmers, though the CAG flagged severe institutional irregularities in its audit report later.

Since then, several States have routinely announced debt waivers. Policymakers have operated under the assumption that these measures would completely arrest farmer suicides. But, empirical data reveal that even after the massive 2008 intervention, the tragedy of farm suicides persisted. The pre-waiver period of 1995-2008 recorded an average of 41 farmer suicides per day, but this tragic figure actually rose to 43 during the post-waiver period of 2009-2011.

The core malady The primary reason farmers default on credit is that the absolute returns realised from crop cultivation are abysmally low. According to the situation assessment survey of agricultural households (2021), the average monthly net receipt from crop cultivation for a farm household in Tamil Nadu was just ₹2,641, amounting to a meagre daily income of about ₹88. Can a farm family manage basic household expenditures with this amount?
