Category: Editorial
Title: FCNRB deposits Why higher interest rates may Part Two

FCNR(B) deposits: Why higher interest rates may be needed to bring in NRI dollars

By allowing banks to raise fresh three-to five-year FCNR(B) deposits without bearing the full cost of hedging foreign exchange exposure, banks can offer more attractive rates to overseas depositors without significantly impacting their margins. Why should Indian banks hike rates? Indian banks are yet to work out and announce the new rates on FCNR(B) deposits.

"Banks need to more than match the interest rates offered by foreign banks in various jurisdictions like the US. Otherwise, funds won't come. FCNR(B) deposit inflows declined sharply in FY26," said an official of a nationalised bank. SBI currently offers around 3.85% on three-to five-year US dollar Certificate of Deposit (CD) products in the US.

Comparable offerings from US banks are slightly higher, with Merrick Bank providing a 4.20% annual percentage yield (APY) on a three-year CD and Morgan Stanley offering about 4.30% APY on a five-year CD. These rates are higher than what are being offered by Indian banks for FCNR(B) scheme. CD rates are widely expected to remain steady as the US interest-rate cycle is on a pause mode now.

Following three reductions in the federal funds rate by the US Federal Reserve in 2025, many banks had trimmed the yields offered on CDs and high-yield savings accounts. "The jobs data from the US is good, and therefore, the Fed will not cut rates as President Trump wants. The rates are likely to be on hold for some time," said an analyst.

What are the new swap terms and conditions? The latest FCNR(B) swap facility, whose guidelines were announced by the RBI Monday (June 8), comes into effect immediately and will remain open up to October 16 for deposits mobilised until September 30. Banks would be free to price these deposits as per their internal policy, but within the overall ceiling as per the extant guidelines issued by RBI.

The RBI says a bank can avail of the swap facility only once in a week. During any week, the maximum US dollars that a bank would be eligible to swap with RBI would be equal to all eligible FCNR(B) deposits mobilised in equivalent US dollar terms during the preceding week(s) for which the facility has not been availed earlier. Banks can sell US dollars in multiples of $1 million to RBI and simultaneously agree to buy the same amount of US dollars at the end of the swap period.

In the first leg of the transaction, the bank will sell US dollars to the RBI at the FBIL Reference Rate. FBIL refers to Financial Benchmarks India Private Limited, which publishes multiple benchmark interest rates and foreign exchange reference rates daily for the Indian financial market. The settlement of the first leg of the swap will take place on spot basis from the date of transaction.

The second leg of the swap will take place at the same rate as the first leg. The swap will be undertaken at par. Under the framework, banks are also exempted from maintaining the cash reserve ratio (CRR) and statutory liquidity ratio (SLR). While CRR is the minimum percentage of a bank's total deposits required to be maintained as liquid cash, SLR refers to the minimum percentage of deposits that banks must maintain in highly liquid assets (such as cash, gold, or government-approved securities) before they can lend money to customers.
