Category: Editorial
Title: FCNR B scheme a range of possibilities Part Two

FCNR (B) scheme  -  a range of possibilities

If the same is EBLR based lending the spread can be higher. Deploying these funds in government paper (in case the loan portfolio is not growing) may not give the same kind of returns as that on loans. This is something individual banks will be cognizant of, when structuring their interest rates and targeting flows.

Fifth, the FCNR scheme allows for swapping only the principal amount and not the interest. For payment of interest of 6-7 per cent which banks are offering, appropriate hedging should be in place as this will add to the cost. Redemption factor Sixth is the question of redemption of these deposits in three or five years.

Now, the dollars that will come in now will be swapped with the RBI and the reserves built up. Depending on the tenures of these deposits, there could be drop in forex reserves unless there are robust inflows from exports, FPIs and FDI. The RBI will have to prepare for this and probably build buffers.

This will be over and above the buy-sell swaps that the RBI has used to bolster liquidity in the market. In this process, banks will need to have liquidity to buy dollars. Last, from the point of view of the saver, these funds would be locked in for the contracted period. Hence, it becomes a premier long-term investment.

So the depositors will have to contend with the tax rules in their countries regarding interest earnings. However, for those who have leveraged their deposits to take loans to invest in these deposits, the changing interest rate in the home country as well as the structuring of the leverage would be important considerations when putting their money in these FCNR deposits. The scheme introduced helps in building forex reserves and providing liquidity simultaneously.

As banks swap the dollars with the RBI, the supply in the market remains unchanged so the rupee will not appreciate. However, the mechanics have to be studied for all savers and the financial system must take into account future provisions to handle redemptions. This adds to the interest in the scheme.

By Madan Sabnavis The writer is Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda. Views expressed are personal
