Category: Editorial
Title: Fend off WTO watershed Part Two

Fend off WTO watershed

In addition, the leverage of developing countries to influence future negotiations would be considerably diminished under a "reformed" WTO, thereby further marginalising them. Third, another issue of particular interest to the US is likely to be the moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions. At MC14, the US would seek to convert the temporary moratorium into a permanent outcome and also expand its scope to include digital content transmitted electronically.

A permanent moratorium would not only deprive developing countries of an important source of revenue but also prevent them from using taxation measures to regulate digitally delivered services. Some trade experts in India have argued that a permanent moratorium would promote India's export of IT services. However, this ignores the reality that on account of the existing commitments of the developed countries on cross-border delivery of services, even without a permanent moratorium they cannot impose customs duties on India's IT services exports.

Thus, a permanent moratorium will only entail costs for India but not result in any tangible gains. Fourth, MC14 is expected to witness tough negotiations on agriculture  -  a subject in which some export powerhouses are seeking a mandate to relaunch negotiations with new approaches. For India, going back to the drawing board would have far-reaching and damaging implications.

The country would have to start its battle on food security afresh. It would also be hard put to defend its minimum support price scheme for rice, wheat, pulses, etc. Further, new approaches to agriculture subsidy reduction could erode India's flexibility to provide subsidised power, fertiliser, and irrigation to its farmers, while allowing the developed countries to continue with their high farm subsidies.

Finally, global agri-businesses in the US, the EU, and a few other countries would seek to pry open India's agriculture market by getting it to lower its bound tariffs. This would open the floodgates for cheap imports, jeopardising the livelihoods of hundreds of millions of India's resource-poor subsistence farmers. It would deal a severe blow to food security and consequently economic security, of the country.

If India and some of the larger developing countries do not remain resolute in defence of their interests, then MC14 would certainly be a turning point to their disadvantage. The onus is on India to stand firm and create alliances with other like-minded countries, if it wants to prevent the WTO from being deformed into an institution that exclusively serves the interests of the rich and powerful countries. ABHIJIT DAS The author is an international trade expert
