Category: Editorial
Title: Financial institution for social Part One

Financial institution for social infrastructure?

Financial institutions focus entirely on physical infrastructure verticals, even as the funding needs of social sector need to be met through new financial innovations India's social sector has significant fund requirements. Per recent data, India's social sector expenditure (across education, healthcare, water and sanitation, and others for Centre and States: Economic Survey FY25) is estimated at approximately ₹26 lakh crore.

As highlighted in Bain & Company's India Philanthropy Report 2025, there is an estimated funding gap of ₹14 lakh crore annually (almost the entire current bank credit outstanding to the infrastructure sector), expected to reach ₹16 lakh crore by 2029. Further, it has been estimated that to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, developing countries would have to increase spending in key verticals such as healthcare and education alone by 75 per cent (G20 Independent Experts Group). Recognised as an indirect engine of growth, the social sector is vital for inclusive and human development.

Considering the importance, the Central and State governments have increased their social spending expenditure (SSE) in recent years. Per the last Economic Survey, SSE as a percentage of total expenditure (Centre + States) increased from 23.3 per cent in FY21 (pandemic year) to around 26.2 per cent in FY25 (with education and health constituting approximately 58 per cent). During the period, the SSE grew at a CAGR of 15 per cent.

The trend is expected to continue, considering its importance. The social sector remains a consistent focus in Budget documents. Low spending Notwithstanding growing emphasis, India's spending on the social sector remains at relatively low levels (7.8 per cent of GDP as against 13 per cent requirement).

Financing of social infrastructure (capex) remains a problem due to various reasons (such as low user charges). This has resulted in the government taking several measures over time. These include the inclusion of social infrastructure in the MoF harmonized list of Infrastructure; mandating it in bank priority sector lending (PSL), introducing Viability Gap Funding (VGF), establishing the Social Stock Exchange (for equity and bond solutions), encouraging Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) through the New Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP), and introducing Partial Credit Enhancements (PCEs) to facilitate infrastructure projects access bond markets.

Despite various initiatives, external funding in social infrastructure remains constrained, and the sector remains largely publicly funded out of budgetary allocations and budgetary support. Further, data from lending institutions point to continued overemphasis on more established infrastructure verticals (such as power, telecom, and roads). Bank credit (outstanding) to the infrastructure sector presently stands at around ₹14 lakh crore (RBI) and remains heavily skewed towards traditional verticals.

This has been a noted issue (Economic Survey 2023-24). The problem becomes more acute considering the limited resources of the government and efforts to reduce the fiscal deficit. Even in Development Finance Institutions (DFIs), the trend remains the same. This is despite the emergence of new domestic and multilateral DFIs in recent years.

To take the example of the recently established National Bank for Infrastructure and Development (NaBFID). As of September 2025, over 70 per cent of its lending portfolio comprises roads, renewables, power and T&D sectors. Social infrastructure (including water and sanitation) made up only approximately 4 per cent.
