Category: Editorial
Title: Fiscal health index rewards prudence alone Part Two

'Fiscal health index' rewards prudence alone

Both sub-indicators, namely State Own Revenue/GSDP and State Own Revenue/Total Expenditure, merge institutionally earned tax revenue with geographically endowed non-tax revenues like mining royalties in Odisha, and mineral or resource-linked PSU dividends in Chhattisgarh. No State can manufacture these mineral deposits, nor can these geographical advantages enjoyed by these states cannot be replicated through policy. Thus, mineral-rich states consistently top the revenue mobilization rankings not due to their superior tax administration or fiscal effort, but rather due to geological advantages.

To obtain a much more credible picture of true fiscal self-reliance, it is preferable to differentiate own-tax revenue from own non-tax revenue and to introduce an indicator of tax buoyancy. The southern fiscal paradox deepens The comparative analysis of all 18 major general category States in the FHI based on composite score change, rank movement, and tier transition across both editions has revealed that five states, namely, Haryana, Bihar, Goa, Jharkhand, and Maharashtra improved, seven states Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, and Kerala remained stable, and six States Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, and Punjab deteriorated. As Tamil Nadu got degraded from the performer tier to the aspirational tier in FHI 2026, both Kerala and Tamil Nadu, which were regarded as India's undisputed leaders in literacy, life expectancy, and composite human development outcomes, now occupy the bottom-most position in the index.

On the other hand, Odisha, Goa, and Jharkhand, which ranked poorly on the human development outcomes, have occupied the top positions in fiscal health. This is not a mere coincidence; it's structurally produced. High-developed states bear high committed expenditure as the fiscal legacy of their social investment over decades.

They often receive proportionately lower central devolution despite contributing more to the national GDP. The FHI penalizes all of this, and it rewards states that maintain fiscal surpluses while their citizens lack access to the quality public services they deserve. Thus, States that are fiscally healthy but poor in human development outcomes must be encouraged, in order to spend more on social development, not celebrated for fiscal restraint.

What needs to be changed The Fiscal Health Index is a good indicator, and its methodological consistency is a true strength. But its present form requires modifications. Measuring fiscal health only based on fiscal indicators mislead the states performance in development. Therefore it should be linked to the socio-economic development of the states than mere performance in fiscal indicators.

A Viksit Bharat will not be built by States that simply spend less, but rather it will be built by those states that spend for their social development. By Christopher Sujoy Thomas, Niranjana VH & Sumalatha BS
