Category: Editorial
Title: Food Security Act amendment will hurt the Part Two

Food Security Act amendment will hurt the poorest

There are no gainers in this bargain, only losers. Women living alone will be the worst affected. There are nearly one million of them in the Antyodaya category. According to HCES data, 85 per cent are widows and 74 per cent are illiterate. As recent work by Esther Duflo and others brings out, many of them have to cope with mental stress and social stigma in addition to economic destitution.

Their monthly foodgrain rations will crash from 35 kg to 7 kg under the proposed amendment  -  a reduction of 80 per cent. Of course, 35 kg per month exceeds the foodgrain requirements of many small households. The surplus, however, can generally be cashed or exchanged for other commodities. AAY's monthly rations are best thought of as an economic resource, not just food to eat.

Oddly, this reduction of entitlements for the country's poorest households is being justified in the name of equity. The argument is that it will reduce the variation in per-capita entitlements within the Antyodaya category. This is like reducing the salaries of peons on the ground that it will reduce wage disparities between peons and chowkidars.

The real motive for this amendment is likely to be to save money. The potential savings, however, are small. In 2023-24, the foodgrain allocation for AAY was 10 million tonnes, and offtake was 8.8 million tonnes. Using HCES data on household size, we can easily infer AAY's foodgrain requirements under the proposed approach: 7.6 million tonnes.

At best, the proposed amendment will save around 2 million tonnes of foodgrain per year. This is of little value when the government is already struggling with massive excess stocks. It is for the poor that every grain counts. Instead of chasing minor savings at the expense of the poor, the government should revamp the AAY programme.

The AAY lists are very old, and they must be rife with inclusion and exclusion errors. Without cancelling any ration cards, better-off households could be moved to the priority category to make space for those who are unfairly left out of AAY. Expanding the AAY quota would also be useful to ensure full coverage of all destitute households.

Even more useful would be to add dal and edible oil to the PDS entitlements of Antyodaya households, as some states have already done off and on. As for the proposed NFSA amendment, it is best thrown in the dustbin. Written by: Jean Drèze & Mohammad Zameer Drèze is visiting professor, Department of Economics, Ranchi University and Zameer is independent researcher based in Ranch
