Category: Editorial
Title: For true nari shakti take jobs where women Part Two

For true nari shakti, take jobs where women workers are

They need hostel facilities and stay far away from their families. It leads to high attrition rates and loss of talent. But what if garment clusters are developed in states that supply surplus labour all over India? In Muzaffarpur, Bihar, Pearl Global Industries has taken this initiative and set up a manufacturing unit that offers a glimpse of what this transition may look like.

As of early 2026, the factory employed 650 workers on 500 machines, with plans to scale to 3,000 workers by March-April 2027. Almost 90 per cent of the workforce is female  -  residents of the district itself. All are first-generation factory workers; women with no prior industrial experience, trained from scratch by the firm.

This is a private firm making a commercially rational bet: That a woman worker in a labour-surplus state, if trained, will be productive, reliable, and loyal. In the course of this transition, she retains her social ties, her family, her community. The Centre and states can incentivise such firms in the apparel sector.

The PM MITRA scheme, designed to create large-scale, plug-and-play textile parks with shared infrastructure, represents exactly the kind of instrument needed. Yet, Bihar does not have a single PM MITRA park, nor Jharkhand or Odisha. UP, the most populous state in India, has just one such park. The challenge is in skilling the women workforce that makes those factories globally competitive.

Bihar's industrial policy recognises this. Training incentives of up to Rs 20,000 per worker exist on paper. Employment-linked incentives allow textile units to claim a subsidy of up to Rs 5,000 per month per employee, or reimbursement of up to 300 per cent of employer contributions to ESI and EPF. It is the weak training infrastructure and poor industry alignment that are the problem.

China and Vietnam developed cluster-anchored training institutions that evolved alongside industry, with curricula designed by firms and quality assurance maintained by the state. Bihar needs to make a similar transition. Three shifts are essential. First, invest in training infrastructure and curriculum quality, co-managed by industry, government, and technical institutions.

Public money should fund infrastructure and quality assurance; firms should lead curriculum design and on-the-job upgrading. Second, restructure employment-linked incentives to be explicitly linked to the employment of women with higher subsidy rates, particularly in the first two years of employment when attrition and training costs are highest. Third, bring infrastructure to where the women are.

The PM MITRA scheme may be the right instrument, but it has to open such parks in Bihar, Jharkhand and Odisha that supply labour to southern clusters. That would build true nari shakti. Will the government focus on this? Only time will tell. Written by: Ashok Gulati, Ayushi Gupta, Bidisha Chanda Gulati is distinguished professor, Gupta is research associate, and Chanda is research assistant at ICRIER.

Views are personal
