Category: Editorial
Title: Frankensteins Monster Part Two

Frankenstein's Monster

Infectious diseases specialists were worried because AI-designed viruses could have benefits, such as the creation of targeted bacteriophages that could help tackle antibiotic-resistant infections in new ways, but at the same time, remembering that most probably the Covid-19 pandemic was caused by a virus that leaked out of a Chinese lab, the ability to design whole, functional, unknown artificial viruses could become a serious bio-security risk. Shorn of computerese, we now have AI models that are capable of thinking independently, and planning and executing tasks that were not contemplated by their handlers. Additionally, these AI models are capable of breaching the most secure computer systems and altering them.

Ergo, there is a real danger that one day a rogue AI model may decide to infiltrate the defence, banking, or communication network of some country, and cripple it in the process. In the worst-case scenario, a rogue computer scientist may deploy an AI model to infiltrate and destroy, or hold to ransom computer systems of a rival organization, or even another country. A rogue bio-scientist may develop an artificial virus that could endanger the entire human race.

Endless variations on these themes are possible; a rogue country with AI capabilities could easily threaten the existence of the entire planet. This is not an impossible denouement. Technology is value neutral; AI is designed to make life easier by solving mundane human problems, but there are infinite possibilities of misusing it to manufacture deepfakes, spread disinformation, violate privacy, mount cyber attacks etc.

The real problem is that with a global investment of US$1.6 trillion (roughly Rs.1.5 crore crores) in AI, and an ongoing global race for dominance, no player is ready to step back. The US Government has washed its hands of the matter, by asking AI companies to better manage their security risks. China has churned out equally powerful AI models like DeepSeek, Alibaba's Qwen, and Moonshot AI's Kimi, on shoestring budgets.

Since the Chinese AI programme is much less in the public glare, the threat from autonomous Chinese AI models is not so well documented, but there can be no doubt that it does exist. We have to be extra cautious about Chinese advances in AI, as India is often the target of Chinese misadventures. Even otherwise, AI may pose a grave threat to the job market.

Entry level jobs in IT and coding, customer support and back-office operations are all under threat from AI. Major Hollywood studios are quietly embedding AI into everyday filmmaking for script ideation, visual effects, and digital de-aging, while actors and film crews have been replaced by AI-created characters in the immensely popular Chinese micro-dramas. The US is the worst hit; job listings for entry-level corporate roles, traditionally available to recent college graduates, have fallen by fifteen per cent, while the number of applications per job has surged by thirty per cent.

An estimated two lakh to three lakh jobs were lost due to AI in the US in 2025, though employers strenuously avoided that label, saying that only 54,836 jobs were cut because of AI. AI is sure to endanger the future of ordinary US techies, yet AI is being actively promoted by uber rich tech czars. Last year, Elon Musk, the world's first and last trillionaire (though, only briefly), announced that Tesla will manufacture the AI-enabled humanoid Optimus robot, which will be capable of working 24X7, with five times the productivity of a human being.
