Category: Editorial
Title: Frankensteins Monster Part Three

Frankenstein's Monster

Optimus will retail for US$20,000 to US$30,000 ~ the price of a mid-sized car. Advent of the AI-enabled humanoid robots, promised by Musk, would mean that all tasks, even those involving complex decision-making, can be automated, and completed, without human interference. With higher-order machines controlling lower order machines, the need for humans in a futuristic office, or factory, will be minimal.

This is not science fiction; Elon Musk posted on X: "AI and robots will replace all jobs. Working will be optional, like growing your own vegetables, instead of buying them from the store." As regards displaced workers, Musk suggested that they could be pensioned off on a fixed sum, a sort of Universal Basic Income (UBI); a sentiment echoed by his fellow robber barons, Sam Altman (CEO of Open AI), Chris Hughes (co-founder of Facebook) and Pierre Omidyar (founder of eBay). This could be the end of human civilisation, as we know it ~ if Musk et al have their way.

All of us would have to survive on doles, and there would be few opportunities for anyone seeking to better his lot. The progeny of UBI beneficiaries would most probably, be forced to subsist on UBI, while Musk, and his multiple progenies would lord it over the world, living the high life, roaming at will in their private jets. Consider India's farm sector, which employs more than 26 crore workers; mechanised agriculture, aided by humanoid robots, could bring down agricultural employment to a trifling figure.

One can be sure that the fate of the more than 26 crore jobless farmers would not be of much interest to Musk, or his fellow musketeers. As the world lurches on to an uncertain future, one is reminded of Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard: "It happened that a fire broke out backstage in a theatre. The clown came out to inform the public.

They thought it was a jest and applauded. He repeated his warning. They shouted even louder. So I think the world will come to an end amid the general applause from all the wits who believe that it is a joke" By DEVENDRA SAKSENA (The writer is a retired Principal Chief Commissioner of Income-Tax) In saying no to Trump, Carney is doing the right thing The Canadian PM is doing something rather rare in the Trump era: A middle power is saying no to a superpower By instructing his negotiators to walk away from trade talks with the US  - reportedly over Washington's last-minute demands  -  Canadian Prime Minister Mark Carney has drawn a red line against President Donald Trump's weaponisation of tariffs.

Canada's economy is deeply integrated with that of its superpower neighbour, and Carney's "dollar-for-dollar" retaliation against Trump's 50 per cent tariffs on around $20 billion worth of Canadian goods will inevitably hurt businesses and workers on both sides of the border. Among other "unacceptable" demands, said PM Carney, Washington seeks to restrict Canada's ability to pursue trade deals with other countries, which would amount to an erosion of Canadian sovereignty. Elected to power not too long ago on a promise to stand up to Trump's threats, Carney has done the right thing by rejecting an unequal trade relationship.

In doing so, he is also acting on his assessment at Davos seven months ago: The "rules-based order", he had said, "is fading". The Trump tariffs touch products from Canadian wine and dairy to furniture, clothing, cement and hockey equipment. Should Carney proceed with Canada's retaliation from September 8 onwards, there will be risks, both political and economic, for his country.
