Category: Editorial
Title: Gauging the costs for clean energy transition Part Two

Gauging the costs for clean energy transition

Costs of storage Storage costs (both battery and pumped storage) for renewables will likely entail additional capital expenditure of $28 billion for these EMEs, bringing the overall climate finance needed for 2024-30 to $149 billion, or $21 billion annually. Excluding China, the remaining eight EMEs will require $94 billion, or $13 billion annually, in cumulative climate finance (including storage costs) to shift to renewable sources of power. These estimates do not account for the additional costs of adapting electricity grids to cleaner energy sources.

Large-scale growth in AI and data centres may also increase energy demand more than envisaged. Of the nine EMEs we studied, India is projected to need the largest amount of climate finance  -  $57 billion, or 38 per cent of the total estimate  -  to continue decarbonising the power sector, while China will require slightly less, around $55 billion, because the increase in renewables' share of installed capacity is expected to be more pronounced in India than in China. Climate finance as a percentage of GDP will likely be largest in South Africa, at 0.25 per cent, followed by India (0.13 per cent) and Mexico (0.09 per cent).

A decade or so ago, a consensus emerged that financing the energy transition would require massive amounts of capital. But, in the intervening years, the cost of renewables has fallen dramatically. Compared to road transport, cement, and steel in the nine EMEs we studied, the power sector will require the least amount of climate finance for the foreseeable future, even after accounting for storage costs and low renewable load factors.

Now that decarbonising the energy system is much more affordable in EMEs, there is no excuse not to do so. By Rakesh Mohan & Janak Raj Mohan is President Emeritus and Distinguished Fellow, and Raj is Senior Fellow, at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress.
