Category: Editorial
Title: GDP Growth deduction problem Part One

GDP: Growth deduction problem

The change in GDP methodology has thrown up some interesting outcomes. For one, the argument that manufacturing GVA growth has been artificially increased doesn't hold There has been a healthy discourse on the quality of India's GDP statistics. This phenomenon has persisted for years now, each time there is a statistical base-year revision or whenever the latest quarterly print is released.

What is an even bigger positive is that the debate is no longer just confined to analysts and policymakers but has also spread across daily discourse among individuals. This reflects not just greater awareness but also growing interest in the bigger picture facing the Indian economy. The Q1FY27 GDP print was released against the backdrop of the West Asia crisis, with the Indian crude basket averaging $101 a barrel.

India imports more than 80 per cent of its crude oil and gas consumption and is the world's second-largest net crude oil importer. As if the volatile global backdrop wasn't enough, even the weather was unpredictable, with an unprecedented heatwave and an extremely weak start to the monsoon in June. Despite these challenges, Q1FY27 real GDP growth pleasantly surprised on the upside at 7.8 per cent vs 8.6 per cent in Q4FY26.

Given the challenging backdrop, the buoyant growth numbers have naturally created a lot of buzz. Moreover, the change in GDP methodology has thrown up some interesting outcomes on the deflator front. We try to address some of these issues. GDP growth Is GDP growth 2.6 per cent or 7.8 per cent in Q1FY27?

This comparison is wrong on two fronts. First, 2.6 per cent refers to nominal GDP growth calculated as Q1FY27 of the new base GDP over Q1FY26 of the old base GDP. On the old base year series, nominal GDP in Q1FY26 was ₹86.1 trillion, while on the new base GDP this was ₹80 trillion. It is not correct to mix the two base year series as there have been significant methodological changes.

These include a wider set of products and services captured in the new base GDP, reflecting the latest consumption and production trends. Indeed, on the new base GDP, nominal GDP is lower than old base GDP by an average of 3.4 per cent (over FY23 to FY26). This mainly reflects better capturing of the informal sector in the new base GDP, utilizing the latest Annual Survey of Unincorporated Enterprises and Periodic Labour Force Survey.

The second issue is that 7.8 per cent is actually real GDP growth on the new base year. Real GDP captures volume expansion, while nominal GDP captures both volume and price effects. The deflator How is manufacturing deflator growth negative when commodity prices surged in Q1FY27? The deflator is just the ratio of nominal GDP to real GDP; it's a derived number.

Both nominal GDP and real GDP are estimated separately. The manufacturing sector deflator declined by 1.4 per cent YoY in Q1FY27. This ended up boosting real manufacturing GVA growth to 9.2 per cent, while nominal GVA growth was subdued at 7.7 per cent. At first glance, the negative manufacturing deflator growth might seem strange given that commodity prices had surged during this period due to the West Asia crisis.
