Category: Editorial
Title: GDP Growth deduction problem Part Two

GDP: Growth deduction problem

However, this outcome is due to the double-deflation methodology in the new base GDP. Here, the output and input of a company are deflated separately to arrive at real value added. Separate price indices are utilised to capture differing trends in output prices and input prices. In Q1, there was a surge in input costs such as crude oil prices and other raw materials, but output prices of manufactured products saw a much more moderate pickup.

In the old base GDP, a single-deflation methodology was used for the manufacturing sector, which would deflate output and input using the same price index. The double-deflation method is superior as it captures the differing trends between input prices and output prices. The job of real GDP is to capture changes in volume.

The 9.2 per cent real GVA growth for manufacturing in Q1FY27 is reflecting the fact that the volume of sales growth outpaced the volume of input growth. The fact that input prices rose significantly faster than output prices should not impact real GVA growth. It should impact nominal GVA growth, and we saw this with a much more subdued growth rate for manufacturing.

Overall, nominal GDP growth was more subdued at 10.3 per cent YoY in Q1FY27, reflecting a slowdown in nominal manufacturing sector growth. In the old base GDP, nominal GDP growth would have been much higher due to the deflator impact. Hence, the argument that manufacturing GVA growth has been artificially increased doesn't hold.

Other indicators Lastly, looking beyond GDP, what are the other indicators telling us about growth? Even if one were to doubt the GDP numbers, there are numerous other high-frequency indicators that can be looked at to get a sense of growth. The most important is listed company performance. In Q1FY27, non-financial, non-government listed companies' EBITDA growth jumped to 16.9 per cent YoY as per analysis done by the RBI.

This compares to 9.7 per cent growth in Q4FY26. Note that these are nominal growth rate numbers. The outperformance was due to much stronger sales growth, which compensated for the rise in input costs. The strong performance of the corporate sector is also reflected in corporate tax collections as well as GST collections.

Bank credit is another indicator of the health of the economy. Currently, bank credit growth is tracking at 18.3 per cent YoY as of August 15, 2026. Sectoral details reveal that the strong credit off-take is broad-based across industries, services, and personal credit. Credit quality also continues to improve across banks as well as loan categories.

Hence, even when one considers other indicators, they all point towards strong underlying growth momentum despite a challenging global environment. By Gaura Sengupta The writer is chief economist, IDFC First Bank
