Category: Editorial
Title: Global imbalances are back Part One

Global imbalances are back

The global economy is in a precarious position with heightened geopolitical frictions and the geoeconomic fragmentation of supply chains Multiple shocks have rocked the global economy. While the bulk of economic research is focused on understanding the impact of these shocks, one school of research is warning us about global imbalances making a comeback. Before discussing global imbalances, we need to understand current accounts.

The current account records exports and imports of all goods and services of a country with the rest of the world. In case of a current account surplus, an economy's exports are higher than imports, whereas a deficit indicates that exports are lower than imports. Deficits are financed via capital inflows, which come from countries with surpluses.

They invest these surpluses as capital outflows. It is natural that some countries will have surpluses and others will have deficits, and it is also a zero-sum game. The problem starts when these deficits/surpluses become large and persistent, transforming into so-called global imbalances. Global imbalances have occurred in multiple waves since the 1870s, which is when the journey of globalisation began.

In the first wave, capital flowed from the UK to Australia, in line with growth theories that suggest return on investments are higher in poor, capital-scarce countries. The wave ended as a result of World War I. In the 1920s, the US became a surplus country that channelised funds to Latin America and Europe.

That ended in crisis due to the abrupt tightening of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve. Global imbalances were limited for the next 50 years due to the Great Depression, World War II, and the Bretton Woods system that limited capital flows. The breakdown of Bretton Woods in 1971 led to the return of global imbalances with one major change.

Unlike previous waves where the surplus countries were rich and deficit countries were poor, the major deficit country in this case -  the US  -  was the richest. It financed its deficits from other surplus countries. Till the 1980s, US deficits were financed by oil-exporting countries and Japan who were then joined by emerging countries such as China.

This reverse flow of capital from emerging to developed countries was first highlighted by economist Robert Lucas and became known as the Lucas paradox. Economists explained the paradox by highlighting that the poor countries, apart from facing political risks, also lacked human and physical capital as well as financial systems. Thus, the returns were not as high there, as suggested by the growth theory.

Economists also tried to explain what was leading to high deficits and surpluses in the US. In 2002, then Fed Chair Ben Bernanke, in a famous speech, said that the US generated high deficits as its investments were higher than savings, and the rest was financed by borrowing from abroad. The savings were low as high government deficits were eating into the savings pool.

China was doing the opposite by deploying their higher savings into global markets, particularly US government bonds, financing the latter's high current account deficits and budget deficits. In Bernanke's words, there was a savings glut in emerging countries, particularly China, that led to the reverse flow of capital. The speech sparked wide debates among economists on whether a savings glut or investment deficit led to the imbalances.

The debates on global imbalances paused following the 2008 crisis. In fact, a few economists opined that global imbalances led to the crisis. Excess savings depressed interest rates around the world, leading to a search for higher yields, which found their way in housing markets and complex financial products.
