Category: Editorial
Title: Govt must build gas storage on a war footing Part One

Govt must build gas storage on a war footing

The Middle East crisis has put a severe strain on gas supplies. Creating more storage capacity is vital in dealing with it The war between US-Israel and Iran has predictably led to an energy crisis for Asia. India is also among the three-largest energy consumers in the world - following China and the US.

If the prevailing situation continues at the Strait of Hormuz, for a price-sensitive consumer like India, higher oil prices will result in a terms-of-trade deterioration, while disruption in the Strait will also hit LNG supply. India's energy demand is growing at the fastest rate among major global economies, driven by rapid industrialisation, urbanisation, and a rising population. The country remains highly dependent on external sources, importing over 85 per cent of its crude oil and nearly 50 per cent of its natural gas (LNG).

Not only will India face higher replacement costs for LNG cargoes, the price-sensitive sectors  -  particularly industrial users and smaller gas distributors  - may need to rework their sourcing strategy. Reworking supply contracts Key players such as Petronet LNG Ltd, India's largest LNG terminal operator, have already issued force majeure notices to its offtakers as its vessels cannot safely navigate the Strait to reach loading ports. This has also led to major gas marketers like GAIL (India) Ltd to rework their supply to customers in priority order.

According to information available, India operates eight major LNG terminals with a combined nameplate regasification and storage capacity of 52.7 MMTPA (million metric tonnes per annum). India currently holds about 21 days of LNG inventory, including stocks in transit. The government, reportedly, is working on mandating all LNG terminals to maintain an additional 10 per cent storage capacity beyond day-to-day requirements.

But, is this enough, given the growing demand? With the government increasing the share of natural gas in its energy mix from the current 6.7 per cent to 15 per cent by 2030, as part of its move to transition to a gas-based economy, shouldn't there a focused approach for creating storage facilities? According to International Energy Agency, natural gas markets have gradually rebalanced in recent years following the major shock that followed Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.

A wave of new LNG capacity between now and the end of this decade is expected to transform market dynamics. "But markets remained tight in the first two months of 2026, and depleted storage coming out of the heating season in the Northern Hemisphere is set to increase the call on LNG in the months ahead. An extended loss of output from the Ras Laffan facility in Qatar could significantly exacerbate this market tightness.

Production was shut down following an Iranian attack on the facility on March 2," it said. The concerns are serious. In his statement in Rajya Sabha on Monday on "The Situation in West Asia", the External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar said that "The region is key to our energy security and includes many important suppliers of oil and gas...In view of the implications of this conflict for our energy security, I also seek to address that particular concern.

Government remains committed to ensuring that fully, taking into account, costs and risks of the energy markets. For us, the interests of the Indian consumer has and will always be the overriding priority. Where required, Indian diplomacy has supported the endeavours of our energy enterprises in this volatile situation." Qatar supplies 10-11 MTPA of LNG to India, which is 45 per cent of its imports.
