Category: Editorial
Title: Govt must build gas storage on a war footing Part Two

Govt must build gas storage on a war footing

India has long-term agreements with Qatar, US, Russia, Australia, and UAE among others. What is holding back the government from creating more storage capacity that will serve both our economic and strategic purposes? According to Rajesh Mediratta, the MD & CEO of IGX, "In India, commercial storage needs economic justification, which is seemingly looking difficult because we don't have seasonal peaks as EU, China, US, Japan and Korea face.

But I feel we should build underground storage for at least 10 per cent of our consumption or say one month equivalent of consumption. Taking our consumption as 70 bcm, 7bcm of strategic and 3 bcm of commercial, so 10 bcm of storage looks good." In China 10 per cent storage is mandated by law for all city gas companies, he said. Need for urgency While storage on strategic and commercial terms has been constructed for crude oil in India, the same is not the case for natural gas.

The Oil Ministry had set up a task force to look into the matter. The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulator Board, which plays a key role to in facilitating oil and gas distribution to promote competitive markets, create infrastructure and protect consumer interest, has been nudging the government to set up storage infrastructure for fossil fuels. "With rising consumption of gas, it is becoming imperative to create storages to meet demand during times of unexpected disruption in supply," the Board had suggested.

The Board had also made detailed presentation on the construction of the storage facilities. With rising consumption of gas, even the proposed 10 per cent storage capacity may not be enough. So before it further strains the economy, strategic storage is needed. This will not only handle supply but also to help manage the volatile LNG market.

All developed economies having a significant share of gas in their energy mix have provision of 10-15 per cent gas storage. It also has commercial benefits. By Richa Mishra
