Category: Editorial
Title: Growth strategy amid war Part Two

Growth strategy amid war

India has been building crude oil reserves for some time, but its achievement so far has been quite limited. India's strategic crude oil inventories, estimated at about 24.6 million barrels, are sufficient for only about four-five days of domestic consumption as compared to China's reserves at 1,397 million barrels - 70 times as large and sufficient for covering about more than 90 days of domestic consumption. Japan's strategic crude oil reserves are also comparatively much higher at 263 million barrels, covering consumption of more than 75 days.

India's daily consumption of crude oil is estimated at 5.5 million barrels. India has done well to diversify its sources of crude oil to about 40 countries. According to a PIB release, share of crude oil coming through the Strait of Hormuz has come down to 30% as compared to an earlier share of 45%. Holding commodity reserves means a big one-time cost.

We also need to build up foreign exchange reserves to meet emergencies. India's current level of foreign exchange reserves is a good buffer. But we must note these reserves are not helpful in times of supply disruptions. The world is in a flux. Many far-reaching changes are happening. The introduction of AI will have an impact on the entire production process.

Its impact on employment is unclear at the moment. India's strategy of development must take into account all of these changes. But our focus is on changes needed to overcome the problems thrown up by the recent shocks to the world trade. These are compelling us to become self-sufficient in the production of certain critical inputs.

This we should do without sacrificing efficiency. Efficient import substitution may be a compulsion with respect to certain products. The authors: C Rangarajan is former Chairman, Prime Minister's Economic Advisory Council, and former RBI governor; and DK Srivastava is former Director, Madras School of Economics.
