Category: Editorial
Title: Health care does not need the PPP route Part Two

Health care does not need the PPP route

Two rooms, measuring 500 square feet each, would also be provided for free to set up a Jan Aushadhi pharmacy and for medico-legal work. The need for evidence-based assessment There have been protests and much disquiet over the proposed policy, with the allegation of "privatisatising" what is envisioned to be a public asset. There is apprehension that middle class and poor students would lose out on opportunities to study, lose job opportunities as the private investor would be under no obligation to adhere to quotas for recruitment, and pay out of pocket for services that are currently free.

The contract seems faulty as the risks do not appear to be evenly shared. The risk of delayed payments, earmarking virtually the whole hospital  -  70% of the beds  -  for patients to be referred by the government and treated at Ayushman Bharat rates and all outpatient treatment free, may only lead to incentivising the private investor to game the system by charging under the table capitation fees; resort to shortcuts in appointing the full complement of faculty (who are also very difficult to find); make compromises on the quality of care, and deny care, on various pretexts, so as to divert the earmarked beds on the plea that demand is low. The risk is greater for the government in case the investor fails, as the only remedy is the judiciary which in turn could take several years to adjudicate.

The idea of giving away all control over the district hospital, and for 66 years, needs to be reconsidered and better justified. Evidence shows that with comprehensive effective primary care, 30% of hospitalisation can be averted, besides the fact that with advancing technology, the list of day surgeries not requiring hospitalisation is increasing. Technology is rapidly disrupting known delivery systems and arrangements.

Thus, there is a need for a more thorough evidence-based assessment, keeping in view the shifts in disease burden, demographic profile and technology, to justify the need for 650 beds uniformly across the State. Besides, the PPP arrangement at the district level only fragments the public health system and in the long run, harms its organic development. System efficiencies need vertical integration of primary, secondary and tertiary care to ensure a strong referral system and the smooth patient pathways required for continuum of care.

This is central to coping with chronic diseases and good patient management. Inefficiencies in the system The health system in Andhra Pradesh has several inefficiencies due to inadequate infrastructure in turn linked to chronic underfunding and a large number of vacancies, particularly among specialists and in rural areas. The worry is that the already critical situation of vacancies in rural areas and government facilities will be further exacerbated if medical education is commercialised (as evidence shows that students after paying huge fees are more inclined to go abroad, work in the private sector and live in urban cities).

Therefore, it is necessary for the government to invest in ensuring doctors and specialists at subsidised rates (instead of the present model of selling 50% seats) so that the government can build a pool of doctors who are willing to work in public health, in rural areas and in public hospitals. Given these serious concerns, opting for the PPP route on grounds of financial stringency seems facetious as there are several options available to raise capital. The PPP route is also cause for concern as privatisation requires a strong state with institutional capacity to enforce laws and contracts.
