Category: Editorial
Title: Helping MSMEs cope with ESG compliance Part Two

Helping MSMEs cope with ESG compliance

However, MSMEs are mostly focused on immediate survival. Their inability to make the upfront ESG investment (wastewater treatment, cleaner dyeing, pollution control, better worker welfare facilities, digital traceability etc.) creates a significant barrier to their long-term resilience. Although the government has taken several steps such as export credit support, market diversification and is negotiating trade agreements with various countries, a more targeted approach is needed for MSME exporters.

Measures suggested To improve their ESG preparedness the following may be done: (i) Access to blended finance so that they get concessional finance windows or guarantees (public/private) for their ESG investments; (ii) Cluster approach for capital and infrastructure which include common effluent treatment plants, common chemical-storage facilities, and renewable energy off-take; (iii) Capacity building via buyer-industry partnerships so that their knowledge of evolving compliance framework improves and they learn how to operationalise them. For example, EU due-diligence rules require businesses to determine that their products are deforestation-free and must therefore provide information to support the claims. Similarly, Higg Index, GOTS, OEKO-TEX, BCI are globally recognised, independent certification system for the textile and leather industry that tests for harmful substances and verifies sustainable production.

Obtaining these certifications improve the market access and competitiveness of manufacturers/suppliers. (iv) A two-stage ESG compliance mechanism needs to be put in place so that compliance intensity would match company size and risk. Baseline practices such as worker contracts, employment records, proper disposal of hazardous waste, monitoring of energy/water usage, safety protocols for chemical handling, record keeping of safety incidents etc.

become mandatory for all and a more rigorous and exhaustive ESG reporting is done by larger entities using Global Reporting Initiative/Carbon Disclosure Project/Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures template. This tiered ESG compliance approach would help larger entities to convert baseline practices into contractual requirements and push their suppliers base, predominantly MSMEs, towards ESG maturity. Getting exporting MSMEs ESG-ready isn't just compliance, it's essential to preserve export markets, secure jobs, and move India's MSMEs up the value chain.

By Sunil Kumar Sinha The writer is Professor of Economics at Institute of Development and Communications (IDC), Chandigarh. Views expressed are personal
