Category: Editorial
Title: Highquality education needs trust between Part Two

High-quality education needs trust between state and institutions, public and private

Technology, management, science, and liberal education institutions need space to interact across boundaries; regulatory consolidation and benchmarking of standards will enable that coordination. With private institutions serving two-thirds of the student population, a strong, unified system for accreditation and public disclosure is necessary to signal quality to both students and parents. Second is the increasing integration of artificial intelligence into how students learn, how teachers design classrooms, and how institutions manage their resources and administration.

India's unique diversity of learner types, institutional histories, and learning models (formal, informal and alternative) positions it to lead the global discourse on context-sensitive AI. This is not just about adopting technology; it is about defining its application in a localised, high-impact way. The launch of the Ministry of Education's four centres of excellence in AI, focused on education, health, agriculture, and sustainable cities, is timely.

By hosting these centres at premier institutions, the state is creating a structured way to explore best practices and address specific future needs for India and the world. The third is a stronger focus on science education. While promoting excellence in science is key to pathbreaking innovation, significant gaps in exposure remain.

Science education needs to become more hands-on and experiential. Utilising campus makerspaces, improving institutional engagement with start-ups and industry for skilling and practice, and ensuring that tools and resources are accessible and robust are how we will cultivate the high-calibre talent pool required for a competitive deep-tech ecosystem. India is making significant strides in massifying education.

Meeting the goal of a 50 per cent gross enrolment ratio by 2035 will require sustained prioritisation of higher education as national infrastructure, as well as the encouragement of new thinking. India has a massive chance to leverage its expanding digital and internet landscape to scale imparting learning. By integrating technology and digital delivery models into institutional frameworks, we can move beyond the constraints of physical capacity to reach every aspiring student.

At the same time, a true love for learning and high academic standards will continue to define quality education. For a Viksit Bharat, high-quality education will produce high-quality talent. That requires implementation from all sides, trust between the state and institutions (public and private), and a relentless commitment to excellence.

The direction is set. Momentum is building. The task ahead is to keep advancing, for India and for India's place in the world. By Ashish Dhawan & Pramath Raj Sinha The writers are founders of Ashoka University. Views are personal Trump's great climate retreat proves  -  India, Global South cannot be dependent on the whims of the US Trump's retreat reveals the precarious nature of multilateralism.

Difficulties, however, can also become an opportunity The significance of President Donald Trump's January 7 Memorandum on the US's abandonment of 66 international organisations has caused a stir in the climate community. This broad-based exit encompasses 31 UN entities, including the UNFCCC and IPCC, as well as an additional 35 entities, such as the Green Climate Fund and the International Renewable Energy Agency, resulting in the end of US participation in emissions reporting, COP negotiations, and climate finance. This isolationism on the climate front will affect the Global South.
