Category: Editorial
Title: How the war in Iran threatens to spill over Part Two

How the war in Iran threatens to spill over

President Trump had earlier declared that every trace of the regime would be removed, along with Iran's nuclear programme (strangely resurrected after Mr. Trump's June 2025 claims to have 'obliterated' it), ballistic missile capability and its navy. Israel's war aims are slightly different: despite Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu's calls for regime change, it is apparent that his preferred outcome is a mortally weakened Iran that need not function as a state.

Israel is more than capable of suppressing sub-state actors that cannot fall back on a strong regime. Tel Aviv has done nothing to help achieve stability in Syria, and its treatment of Gaza tells its own story. Iran's stance The Iranian regime appears to have calculated that if it must go down, it will do so fighting, widening the conflict and drawing in neighbours who harbour U.S.

bases. In doing so, they are hacking at the faultline between Shia Iran and the Sunni Gulf States, turning this conflict into another chapter of the fight for the soul of Islam. This should worry South Asia, because the tinderbox for Sunni-Shia tensions is Pakistan, which is already distracted by rapidly escalating clashes with Afghanistan.

A Pakistan plagued by instability at two borders, including a secessionist movement in Balochistan, is not in India's interests. There should be no illusions about instability's propensity to spread. The stakes are high for India: nine million Indians reside in the Gulf states, their remittances accounting for almost 1.2% of GDP.

The conflict is also imperilling energy supplies. While this is not a conflict of India's making or choosing, it has a stake in this being settled in a manner that leaves a stable Iran. The question now is whether that stability can be achieved in line with the aspirations of the Iranian people. Priyanjali Malik writes on nuclear politics and security.
