Category: Editorial
Title: How India can navigate a turbulent world Part Two

How India can navigate a turbulent world

Unfortunately, capital is going to be costlier going forward, and this will be an additional challenge for India's future growth. The domestic savings rate has fallen from its peak, and while the "quality" of investment, as emphasised in a recent Economic Survey, is important, India will need more domestic saving as the competition for global capital increases. The country's institutions for financial intermediation need serious policy attention.

This includes legal and judicial institutions that affect commercial contracting, as well as tax policies and how they are applied. In the abstract, how to deal with a world of increased turbulence and even disorder is simple: diversify globally, identify opportunities for growth, and boost savings and investment. The devil is always in the details.

And it is tempting for policymakers to try to micromanage those details. Such micromanagement rarely works, if ever. But policymakers can make strategic choices, and put rules in place to facilitate private sector decisions that flow in the direction of those choices. Doing so requires policymakers to balance independence from and cooperation with private sector decision-makers  -  a balance that Peter Evans, after studying the cases of Brazil, India, and South Korea, labelled "embedded autonomy".

The US has had its own version of embedded autonomy as it has grown, but the past few years have seen a rapid descent into crony capitalism. That kind of descent is always a danger. Checks on that possibility come from political competition and competition for investment funds. For India, better financial intermediation and political decentralisation down to the level of the states can strengthen these kinds of competition.

Openness to trade and investment also support competition. India  -  at the national and state levels  -  has so many places it can improve its economic policy framework and detailed policy design that, along with strategic adjustments at the national level, it can thrive amidst turbulence. Written by Nirvikar Singh
