Category: Editorial
Title: How Adam Smith viewed war Part Two

How Adam Smith viewed war

In Edwin Cannan's edition of The Wealth of Nations (1904), Smith comments that the real expenses of war are concealed from taxpayers who are safely ensconced in the metropole far from the war, while the government finances the war by increasing the national debt instead of increasing taxes. In Chapter III: Of Public Debts in The Wealth of Nations, Smith writes that most people will gladly pay slightly more taxes to support wars to get the "amusement" of reading about imperial conquests, unaware that the full costs of war have been added to the national debt. Another prominent figure of the Scottish Enlightenment movement, David Hume, was a lifelong friend of Smith.

It could be interesting to examine the contrasting views of Smith and Hume on the issues of international wars and trade. According to Maria Pia Paganelli and Reinhard Schumacher's recent article, Hume connected wars with the nature of humans, whereas Smith connected wars with the greed of manufacturers and merchants who sought monopolies. Hume was a proponent of a militia, whereas Smith advocated a standing army.

Smith was concerned about the military debt, whereas Hume supported the financing of wars by debt. Smith is considered to be one of the pioneers of the school of thought that relates international trade "as an influence for peace". "Smith hoped and expected commerce to become the universal alternative to war," as Lisa Hill of the University of Adelaide portrayed in the 2009 book British International Thinkers from Hobbes to Namier.

However, as discussed by Paganelli and Schumacher, the wealth created through international trade results in a decrease in the cost of wars, an increase in the ability to fund wars through debt, which in turn results in a decrease in the cost of wars, and an increase in the propensity of those who have a vested interest in international trade to fight wars to expand their markets, thus increasing the frequency of wars. Smith, therefore, cannot assume that commerce shall lead to world peace. Smith also warns us not to assume that peace is guaranteed, even as we support and promote commerce.

This analysis mirrors that of Andrew Wyatt-Walter's argument in a paper published in the Review of International Studies in 1996. Accord to Wyatt-Walter, Smith argued that nations had not been able to discover that "commerce could reveal a true harmony of interests", but that conflict between them had been aggravated, partly by the friction that commerce produces between them, and partly because, in proportion as any nation was advanced, so was it exposed to aggression by others. Overall, Adam Smith's opinions on war are constantly being reinvented, even at this critical moment.

By Atanu Biswas, Professor of Statistics, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
