Category: Editorial
Title: How Adam Smith viewed war Part One

How Adam Smith viewed war

As The Wealth of Nations marks 250 years, Smith's opinions on war are constantly being reinvented Amid the continuing Iran War, this 9th of March marks the 250th anniversary of the publication of Adam Smith's An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, which is widely regarded as the foundation of economics. It's rather interesting to note that the father of economics also had some very important views on the economics of war. Smith, in Book V of The Wealth of Nations, states that the cost of wars has been increasing along with the progress of economics and technology for three reasons: the expense of maintaining a standing army, the creation of costly but efficient warfare, and the prolonging of the wars.

It would, however, have been unimaginable to Smith that 250 years later, the face of wars would be completely changed by the power of technology. This militia question was a highly controversial issue in Scotland, particularly among the inner circle of Adam Smith's close friends, during the 1750s to 1760s when he crafted his lectures. Of course, Smith referred to "the first duty of the sovereign" when he included a separate section on "arms" in his Lectures on Jurisprudence and even elaborated on this topic further in Book V of The Wealth of Nations, Chapter I, Of the expenses of the sovereign or commonwealth.

There are diverse opinions about Smith's views on war and commerce from various scholars, all based on Smith's own works, though. Martin Wight, one of the most prominent scholars on international relations in Britain in the twentieth century, wrote that Adam Smith believed in "a multiplicity of independent sovereign states… whose relationships are ultimately regulated by warfare". But some experts think that it's also possible that Smith saw the problem of warfare as a permanent one because of the existence of the nation-state.

However, Donald Winch, in the 1978 book Adam Smith's Politics, stated that Smith often talked of "the patriotic and heroic military virtues in glowing terms" and "always regarded the art of war as the noblest of arts". It's unclear, though, whether this proves him not to have been opposed to war. At the time of Smith's writing, one of the issues of discussion and disagreement among the Scots was that of defence, specifically that of a permanent army as opposed to a Scottish militia.

Regarding the issue of just wars of defence, Smith was by no means a pacifist, for sure. Smith described the history in the first chapter of Book V of his book as follows: "The civil came to predominate over the military character, and the standing armies of Rome gradually degenerated into a corrupt, neglected, and undisciplined militia, incapable of resisting the attack of the German and Scythian militias, which soon afterwards invaded the western empire." It's then open to invasion by what Smith calls the "poor and barbarous nations". Note that most textual evidence regarding Adam Smith's dislike of war was due to the high price, about which he was always complaining.
