Category: Editorial
Title: Hubris and caution Chinas posture as begins Part Two

Hubris and caution  -  China's posture as 2026 begins

Yet, dysfunctionalities of the party-state were also evident in large-scale sacking of generals. The PLA continued to expand its conventional and nuclear capabilities. Emerging nuclear doctrinal shifts, such as movement toward an "early warning counter-strike" posture, suggest a more assertive and risk-tolerant military.

The Great Power dynamics The most consequential external development was the recalibration of U.S.- China relations under President Donald Trump's second term. Under the U.S. National Security Strategy 2025, China is no longer framed as a systemic rival but primarily as an economic competitor. The Indo-Pacific is no longer the strategic centre of gravity; the Western Hemisphere has taken precedence, reflecting a more inward-looking "America First" approach.

However, America's military intervention regime change in Venezuela, which seriously affected Chinese interests and investments and elicited sharp reactions from Beijing, have shown that the U.S.-China strategic rivalry is intact. The Trump-Xi meeting in Busan in October produced de-escalation, including modest tariff adjustments and a selective easing of export controls. These were transactional bargains, not steps toward a G2.

Yet the perception of a "G2 overlay"  -  a shadow of tacit coordination  -  has serious consequences, as even limited China-U.S. accommodation can constrain the choices of other states. For India, the implications are sobering. The long positive trajectory of the India-U.S. partnership has been disturbed by friction over trade, Russia, and Pakistan.

The U.S. remains committed to preventing Chinese hegemony in Asia but is less inclined to prioritise relations with India as a strategic counter to China. Meanwhile, China believes it has gained relative advantage vis-à-vis the U.S., while Chinese interlocutors increasingly argue that India's interest in stabilising relations with China stems from turbulence in India-U.S.

ties. These twin perceptions make China less inclined to accommodate India's concerns. With Europe, instead of leveraging trans-Atlantic tensions to drive a wedge between Brussels and Washington, China adopted a tough posture  -  digging in on EV subsidies, refusing to curb industrial overcapacity, pushing back hard against EU trade-defence actions, and consolidating its strategic linkages with Russia.

Europe, despite growing alarm over China's "strategic enabling" of Russia's war in Ukraine and fears of industrial hollowing out, found itself constrained due to economic headwinds, dependencies on China, and strategic distractions. China's attempts to stabilise major-power ties were undercut by its harsh response to the Japanese Prime Minister's comment on Taiwan. Beijing signalled that its outreach has clear limits and that it remains unwilling to accommodate divergence on issues it deems sensitive.

Mr. Xi is attaching strategic priority to the Global South, positioning China as its leader and as a stabilising partner amid western retrenchment, and stepping up BRI projects, diplomatic initiatives and influence operations. But this expanding presence has also stirred unease over opaque financing, debt vulnerabilities, environmental concerns, and political leverage Beijing can derive from economic dependence.

Even as China deepened its influence in Southeast Asia, the Gulf, Africa, and Latin America and pushed a China-centric institutional architecture through the AIIB, NDB, and expanded BRICS and SCO, many countries remain cautious about loss of policy autonomy. China continued to treat South Asia as its strategic periphery and pursue a "two-ocean strategy" that normalises PLA Navy operations in the Indian Ocean. On India - China relations India-China relations in 2025 witnessed cautious stabilisation but no substantive progress on structural issues.

The summit-level meeting in Tianjin and other high-level exchanges helped rebuild a damaged relationship. Yet, the situation along the borders remains stable but not normal. Disengagement has not been accompanied by de-escalation or de-induction. "Buffer zones" continue to restrict India's patrolling rights and grazing access.
