Category: Editorial
Title: Hungry engines of the AI age Part One

Hungry engines of the AI age

India must power the future without draining resources; trained workforce will be a strategic need The government of India is positioning the country as a global hub for digital data traffic. The 2026 Union Budget has proposed a 20-year tax holiday for foreign cloud providers using India-based data centres, while domestic transactions continue to get a 15% (safe harbour) margin. Other reasons include encouraging the storing of sensitive data within national borders, and shielding critical data from foreign surveillance and third-party access.

It's fair to now expect enhanced FDI for these long-gestation infrastructure projects and lower-cost institutional capital, leading to increased electronic and electrical manufacture. Lower latency, support for 5G and IoT devices, enhanced multi-cloud set-ups, and improved streaming are other benefits that will accrue. A positive spin-off will be the creation of many direct and indirect jobs.

Google has committed $15 billion, Microsoft about $17.5 billion in artificial intelligence (AI) investments, and Amazon $35 billion over five years, towards this. Global response: Generally, while developing digital economies have welcomed displaced compute capital, there has been widespread public resistance in the developed world to large data centre set-ups. This is because of perceived hyper-consumption of power and water, leading to scarcity, emissions, land use conflict, and price hikes for consuming utilities.

New York has imposed a temporary pause on environmental permits for large-scale data centres. Virginia's Loudoun County, considered the world's data-centre capital, is also considering a moratorium, owing to widespread pushback from residents. There have also been demonstrations to protest against data centres across the US, as perceptions become rigid.

In Chile, Santiago's environmental court is revisiting a permit granted to Google for a $200-million data centre, due to aquifer depletion concerns. Germany is enforcing its Energy Efficiency Act which requires data centre operators to source 100% energy from renewables by 2027, and server heat re-use for municipal heating systems. Meanwhile, West Asia is thinking like India.

Abu Dhabi, for instance, is investing billions to build gigawatt-scale data centres. Leveraging tech to mitigate side-effects: Traditional air and tower cooling consume massive volumes of water and electricity. Now, direct-to-chip cooling to CPUs and GPUs reduces cooling energy and evaporative losses.

Server racks are completely submerged in synthetic fluids to drastically limit water consumption and rack noise. Closed-loop coolers ensure continuous recirculation of water. Data centres are also adopting independent clean energy sources. Like compact nuclear reactors that can provide 100-500 Mw of zero-carbon baseload power directly.

Or advanced grid-interactive lithium-ion and battery flow arrays. AI and orbital data centres: The Indian government's original estimates put electricity demand from data centres at 13.6 Gw by 2031-32. But with new plans veering towards AI data centres, the fresh projection, presented to Parliament by the ministry of power on July 27, increases estimates to 26.3 Gw, based on consultations with utilities and data centre developers.

The gap is sought to be served by renewables. With next-generation AI agents potentially consuming up to 40,000 times more computing power per task, a report from Wood Mackenzie says that the world's largest tech companies are considering putting data centres in space. That grid connections in the US can take seven years, that gas turbine equipment delivery faces long wait times, and construction costs are rising rapidly, polarises the discussion.
