Category: Editorial
Title: If AI is addictive where does the Part Two

If AI is addictive, where does the responsibility lie  -  with big tech or its users?

The first is governments and regulators. These have a key role to play in highlighting the problems, setting the rules of engagement, and creating incentives for other parties to engage with the topic. They can do this by requiring labelling, restricting advertising, applying liability law and providing research funding  -  along with many other mechanisms.

But the most important role in addressing potential addictive behaviour associated with generative AI would be held by big tech companies that develop and own these technologies  -  and stand to benefit financially from them. These companies own and have access to user data, which would be needed to ascertain the features that support or alleviate addiction. They are also the parties that would benefit financially from addiction by increasing user numbers and engagement, the main currency of the digital age.

In addition to these two groups, academic researchers have an important role in collecting and interpreting data, and providing the evidence needed to recognise addiction and addictive features  -  in ways that allow for evidence-based political or legal debate. Finally, civil society organisations such as user or patient groups can help by providing support, advocating for members' interests, and establishing early-warning structures. The point is that none of these interested parties can address the problem on their own.

They need to collaborate. Someone else's problem A key problem at the moment is the lack of structured debate about responsibilities  -  everybody assumes it is someone else's problem. But there is ample precedent showing how greater engagement from those involved with the issue may be achieved. With tobacco, the World Health Organization (WHO) formed the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control  -  a treaty-based mechanism that brought together governments, public health bodies, researchers and civil society to evaluate evidence and draw up common rules.

The International AI Safety Report shows comparable international consensus-building activities are already happening in other aspects of AI. Some responsibility also falls on the users of AI, who should try to avoid or control their own potentially harmful behaviour. But appeals to individual moderation or mindfulness have been shown with other addictions to be insufficient.

While the harms associated with smoking or alcohol misuse are well known, society still relies on age limits, packaging rules and advertising restrictions. Generative AI is being integrated into the everyday fabric of our society. The choices we now make will determine what acceptable use looks like for years to come.

By Bernd Stahl
