Category: Editorial
Title: Indias economic story is one of transition Part Two

India's economic story is one of transition. Challenges exist, but so do strengths

However, context matters. The current account deficit is expected to remain manageable at around 2 per cent of GDP in FY27 and the RBI holds substantial foreign exchange reserves. Importantly, despite cumulative RBI foreign currency sales of around $53 billion in FY26, India's forex reserves were at $682 billion by April 2026, providing import cover for nearly 11 months.

Recent steps taken are also positive for the rupee. We must strongly resist the flawed narrative that the rupee's depreciation is the delayed consequence of RBI's earlier exchange rate management of holding it back. That is not supported by data. Periods of rupee depreciation have been accompanied by reserve depletion as the RBI intervened to defend the currency.

It is remarkable that over a period of nearly 25 years, the average annual depreciation of the rupee has been similar across episodes. This is indeed exchange rate management of the highest order by the RBI. Pandering to the whims of markets allows market players to dictate terms to the central bank by taking positions for their own benefit.

The argument about the rupee being a shock absorber is the easiest way of allowing a limitless fall in the value of the currency, completely delinked from macro fundamentals. India's economic story is one of transition. Challenges exist, but so do strengths. Public debate on economic policy must remain grounded in evidence.

Written by: Soumya Kanti Ghosh The writer is member, PMEAC, member 16th Finance Commission and Group Chief Economic Advisor, State Bank of India. Views are personal Foreseeable accidents: On the recent industrial accidents in India Industrial mishaps are due to accumulated organisational weaknesses Despite there having been a streak of industrial accidents in India of late, the notion that they are isolated and incidental persists. Within days of each other, four workers were killed in a 'mishap' in a septic tank in Surat while nine workers were killed by an explosion at a steel plant in Visakhapatnam.

They appear to be different circumstances: one involved workers entering a confined space and succumbing to toxic gases; the other involved 150 tonnes of molten steel and a violent blast. Yet, industry has known of these risks and had developed preventive measures decades ago. In the Surat incident, four workers entered the tank and were overcome by toxic fumes.

The circumstances resemble a well-known pattern in fatalities in confined spaces, where the first victims are often followed by would-be rescuers who enter without protection. There have been deaths in similar circumstances in Surat's industrial sector in recent years. The working area must be mechanically ventilated and have rescue personnel on standby while the workers must have breathing apparatuses, harnesses and retrieval lines, and clear lines of communication.

Unprotected entry must be strictly prohibited. Septic tank deaths and deaths due to manual scavenging are in fact rarely accidents in the sense of unforeseeable events, but failures of basic safety management, and the recurrence of such incidents speaks to the persistence of that failure. Likewise, while steelmaking is intrinsically more dangerous because it combines extreme temperatures, pressurised gases, heavy equipment, and enormous stores of heat energy, industry still knows the hazards it poses, and further that even relatively small process failures can result in multiple casualties.
