Category: Editorial
Title: Indias diplomatic messaging on Republic Day Part Two

India's diplomatic messaging on Republic Day

After 2014, this practice has evolved into a more sophisticated instrument of multi-alignment. Contemporary invitations are a signal of India's attempt to keep a fine balance between the major powers and building connections with the emerging economies and regional groupings. This indicates not only the strategic flexibility but also a desire to steer through a multipolar world.

This connotation can be substantiated by a number of instances when states intentionally employ national symbols to advance their diplomatic agendas. The Victory Day parades in Russia tend to showcase leaders of the Global South confirming a vision of a multipolar world and breaking the political isolation that the West imposes. Likewise, strategic partners have long been included in the Chinese military parades, reasserting the ideal of the powerful and integrated nation and historical continuity that bound the achievements of the past with those of the present.

The formal celebration functions as a form of strategic communication oriented towards the shaping of global perceptions and demonstration of the Chinese Communist Party's resilience and legitimacy. Turkiye President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has also gradually taken advantage of symbolic gestures grounded in rehabilitation of the Ottoman grandeur to stamp his authority. India's Republic Day symbolic diplomacy is, therefore, closely similar to these activities because it employs India's social and cultural diversities and historical pride in addition to conveying its strategic intent at the international level.

Shifting priorities A closer analysis of the chief guests of India's Republic Day since 2014 reveals that the selection is directly related to the shift in priorities of Indian foreign policy as invitations are skilfully crafted to underscore India's diplomatic intentions. In 2014, when Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe arrived, it was an unmistakable indication of the consolidation of Indo-Japanese strategic partnership with additional focus on "Act East Policy". It was also a subtle message of India's growing interest in the Indo-Pacific region and a foreshadowing of the resurgence of the Quad.

The most significant symbolic milestone was the invitation to U.S. President Barack Obama in 2015  -  the honour to attend India's Republic Day had never been accorded earlier to an American President. This was the most visible symbol of the deepening of India's post-Cold War strategic collaboration with the U.S.

France is now the most welcome Western partner of India, as the invitations to Presidents Francois Hollande in 2016 and Emmanuel Macron in 2024 testify. This confirms that France is considered a trusted strategic ally that supports India's interests in spheres of defence cooperation and strategic autonomy and offers it a more stable variant in comparison with other high-octane yet mercurial relationships with great powers. The visit of Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, the Crown Prince of the UAE, in 2017 emphasised the major areas of the bilateral relationship such as energy security, strong diaspora links and improved regional connectivity, indicating that India was looking to West Asia for reliable strategic partners.

The 2018 Republic Day was an unprecedented diplomatic event as it brought together the leaders from all ASEAN countries to New Delhi, highlighting the ASEAN Centrality in India's Indo-Pacific vision, and the demonstration of capability to intensify cooperation with a region that had already been recognised for its strategic and economic potential. The subsequent invitations were in keeping with the Global South symbolism and multilateral involvements. South Africa in 2019 and Brazil in 2020 highlighted India's commitment towards BRICS and IBSA, showcasing New Delhi's desire to engage in South-South collaboration.
