Category: Editorial
Title: India faces a moment It needs to reform Part Two

India faces a 1991 moment: It needs to reform, relook at subsidies

While official figures show large quantities of urea, DAP, and MOP being supplied, another set of government data  -  the Cost of Cultivation surveys used to determine the minimum support prices for major crops  -  suggests that actual on-farm usage is more than 50 per cent lower than the quantity supplied. The obvious question is: Where does the rest go? Anyone familiar with Bihar's ground realities knows that the state has long been an easy route for fertiliser diversion into Nepal.

Reports from border districts also indicate that subsidised fertilisers are routinely smuggled into Bangladesh. The root cause is the enormous subsidy on urea, which today covers nearly 90 per cent of its cost. The fertiliser subsidy bill, budgeted at Rs 1.71 lakh crore for FY27, is almost certain to exceed Rs 2.25 lakh crore and could even touch Rs 2.50 lakh crore.

The ultimate solution  -  the real brahmastra  -  lies in reforming the entire chemical fertiliser subsidy regime by moving towards a direct benefit transfer system on a per-acre basis, integrated with the PM-Kisan scheme. Concerns relating to tenant farmers can be addressed by triangulating different data sets, provided the government gives this reform the same priority it once accorded the Jan Dhan-Aadhaar-mobile linkage initiative. Once this transition is made, fertiliser prices should be left to market forces.

That would curb leakages and the smuggling of urea, correct the imbalance in the use of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, and improve nutrient use efficiency. Such reforms could save the government at least Rs 40,000 - 50,000 crore annually. If comprehensive reform is politically difficult, the second-best option would be to impose quantitative restrictions on fertiliser sales based on landholding size and the crops being cultivated.

If even that proves unfeasible, a third alternative would be to bring urea under the nutrient-based subsidy scheme, raise urea prices gradually, and potentially reduce the prices of phosphatic and potassic fertilisers, while keeping the overall subsidy bill around Rs 2 lakh crore. A similar issue arises with food subsidies. The food subsidy bill for FY27 is budgeted at Rs 2.28 lakh crore.

Yet, if the government claims that extreme poverty has fallen to 5.3 per cent, according to World Bank standards, or around 11 per cent according to NITI Aayog's Multidimensional Poverty Index, why should free foodgrain continue to be distributed to more than 800 million people? Rationalising the coverage under the scheme or increasing issue prices for those above the poverty line could potentially save another Rs 50,000 crore annually. Failing to undertake these reforms would reflect not caution, but policy timidity.

Written by: Ashok Gulati, Ritika Juneja Gulati is distinguished professor and Juneja a senior fellow at ICRIER. Views are personal
