Category: Editorial
Title: Indian aviation safety its dangerous Part One

Indian aviation safety, its dangerous credibility deficit

The transparent and the truthful report promised on the Ahmedabad air crash in June 2025 appears to be a dream On March 20, 2006, the Chairman of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), Assad Kotoite, delivered this message in Montreal while addressing the Directors General of Civil Aviation Conference on Global Aviation Safety Strategy: "It must be a strategy that recognizes that a weakness in one is a weakness in all. And the thread that must run through this strategy is transparency. By being transparent and freely sharing information with each other and the public, you recapture the ability to act as one, to reinforce each others' actions, and to strengthen public confidence.

"You will be better able to stand united against those who compromise aviation safety... For me, one accident was always one too many, and the loss of even one life, was one too many. Like all of you here, I was entrusted with a noble mission, to protect the lives and well-being of the travelling public.

We have done and must continue to do everything within our power to make sure they get to their destination safely and unharmed, and that no one on the ground will be killed or injured because of an aircraft accident." On, June 12, 2025, Air India flight 171 crashed at Ahmedabad, Gujarat within a minute of its take-off. Out of the 242 passengers, there was one survivor, while 19 people were killed on the ground. India is a signatory of ICAO and has to comply with ICAO Annex 13 Standards for Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation.

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) of the United States and the Air Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) of the United Kingdom were participants in the investigation. The Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) and the Digital Flight Data Recorder (DFDR) were recovered by June 16 and the NTSB's help was taken in downloading and decoding the contents of the two recorders as the Indian authorities did not have the expertise to retrieve all the data. The NTSB and AAIB were aware of the contents.

The Indian government must also be aware of the contents as it ordered commando protection for the chief investigator of AAIB India. This was a clear pointer that it was a serious issue. A vague report, the facts The vague Preliminary report that was released a month after the crash, clearly mentioned two points.

First, the fuel control switches of both engines had moved to cut off from three to four seconds after lift-off. Second, one pilot asked the other pilot 'why did you do that?' And the other responds 'I did not do that.' It has been clearly established that the fuel control switches can only be moved mechanically by lifting the spring loaded switches from run and moving and dropping them into the cut off gate. These switches do not move due an electrical failure or software glitch.

The DFDR and CVR would have clearly indicated what had happened in those critical 15 seconds  -  what was being spoken in the cockpit, who was handling the flight controls and all the ambient sounds in the cockpit area. The NTSB has the best expertise to identify the exact data. If one were to go by details leaked by The Wall Street Journal in July 2025  -  and also in November 2025  -  it appears that there was friction between the U.S.
