Category: Editorial
Title: Indian aviation safety its dangerous Part Two

Indian aviation safety, its dangerous credibility deficit

And Indian authorities that mushroomed into serious differences on the findings. The NTSB will only support technical investigation in an accident. The transparency and the truthful report that India's Minister of Civil Aviation promised on the day of the crash, appears to be a dream. Political massaging of the report will not find favour with the NTSB.

From what this writer hears from former top safety officials in the U.S., the breakdown between U.S. and Indian authorities is the worst he has witnessed and the worst he has seen in an international accident investigation. The state of aviation India has had three fatal accidents in the past 15 years.

In 2010, Praful Patel, then Minister of Civil Aviation, declared that Mangalore airport conforms to all standards of ICAO. The Court of Inquiry committee, under his Ministry, conveniently drafted a report with a litany of lies. Blatant violations such as a rigid concrete structure holding the Instrument Landing System Localiser, that a rescue and fire fighting truck got stuck outside a gate and never reached the burning aircraft, were covered up.

The only positive aspect of the report was the identification of the dangers of flying in hours during the Window of Circadian Low and the lack of rest for crew. The Directorate General of Civil Aviation's Civil Aviation Requirements have been undergoing modifications over 15 years, with extensions due to pressure from airline owners. An example is the way Indigo, a leading private airline, disrupted air travel for thousands of passengers across India and the Minister and the DGCA to their knees.

In 2020, there was the air crash in Kozhikode. There again, there was scant action by Aviation Minister, Hardeep Singh Puri, and later, Jyotiraditya Scindia on safety measures addressing the dangerous operations at the airport. The deadline set for safe operation has long passed. We are now in 2026 and there are no restrictions in operations.

The DGCA, as is the norm, dances to political pressure and is failing in its duty to ensure passenger safety. Immediately after the AI 171 crash, the site was not sanitised. Television crew and cameramen were seen moving all over the site, trampling on and shifting through crash debris even before investigations began, and wiping out important clues.

The airport was opened in three hours, with the zero availability of rescue and fire fighting services. Every flight that operated in this phase did not have rescue and fire fighting services on standby, endangering the lives of every air passenger and even those on the ground. By delaying the findings and couching the facts with misleading statements, the AAIB is playing into the hands of YouTubers and social media narratives.

ACARS and Inmarsat data are being quoted as proof of the flight having operated in dangerous conditions. The data is accessible only between the company that operated the system and an authorised person in the subscribing company. The entire chain of messages will be in an encrypted format. A simple example is how users of WhatsApp are confident about their messages being secure.

The refusal of Apple to comply with the Indian Government order to preload a cyber-safety app citing privacy, security, and consent issues that go against its global policies is another example. It is to the credit of the airline, Air India, that it has not commented or responded to many of these strange narratives. A lesson to learn The Ministry of Civil Aviation and the AAIB should note how the FAA and NTSB act after a crash.
