Category: Editorial
Title: India needs innovative strategies to Part Two

India needs innovative strategies to eliminate TB

A reduction of over 50% in such cases represents a meaningful clinical and public health impact, including reduced health-care costs and patient suffering. The data also highlight a strong signal in school-age children and adolescents, where efficacy exceeds 60% which is an add-on benefit of vaccination in this age group. This is particularly relevant because India currently has no structured TB vaccination strategy beyond infancy.

If confirmed, this could open the door to a booster-dose TB prevention strategy. Need for nutritional support Another important piece of evidence generated from this study is the role of nutrition. Reduced efficacy was observed in individuals with low body mass index (BMI), underscoring the need for nutritional support for vaccines to work optimally in undernourished in context of broader health determinants.

From a programmatic standpoint, VPM1002 offers additional advantages. It is a single-dose vaccine based on a modified BCG platform, making it operationally simpler than multi-dose, adjuvanted vaccines in development. In a country of India's scale, logistical simplicity is a decisive advantage. The vaccine can be manufactured at large scale and cost effectively.

TB is largely a disease of low and middle income countries (LMIC) and their governments must act proactively. Waiting for expensive solutions developed elsewhere is neither practical nor sustainable. LMICs cannot afford to wait for a silver bullet, because there is no one-stop solution for TB, especially when there are results from a Phase III trial conducted in an Indian population across all age groups (six years and above) and against all forms of TB, including PTB and EPTB.

It is to be noted that no other TB vaccine trial to date has studied efficacy against EPTB and none of the currently ongoing trials worldwide has included EPTB as the efficacy end-point. India has navigated similar public health decisions before. TrueNat was the first 'make in India' Molecular test approved and adopted by the National TB Elimination Programme before World Health Organization pre-qualification study.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, Bharat Biotech's Covaxin was initially approved in "clinical trial mode" to enable early access while additional data continued to accumulate. That decision was driven not by perfection, but by urgency and it helped accelerate protection at a critical time. India has also demonstrated this approach with indigenous rotavirus vaccines, which were introduced despite modest efficacy and wide confidence intervals.

Since then, they have helped reduce severe disease and child mortality and have been incorporated into the national immunisation programme (Bhandari et al., The Lancet, 2014). A smarter TB strategy TB is, in many ways, a slow-moving pandemic. Yet, it has not always been met with the same urgency in policy action.

The policy question, therefore, is how innovations, including moderately effective vaccines such as VPM1002 and Immuvac, can be intelligently integrated into the TB elimination programme. Targeted use among household contacts, deployment in school-age children, and alignment with nutrition and preventive therapy programmes could together lead to a more effective TB control framework. A combination of vaccines effective across different indications and age groups may be needed to have an impact.

India's TB challenge is unlikely to be solved by a single breakthrough. It will require a combination of early detection, preventive treatment, targeted vaccination against both pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB, case-based clinical management, nutritional supplementation, and sustained public health investment. Waiting for a perfect vaccine may delay progress indefinitely, especially when no trial other than the PreVenTB trial has evaluated vaccine efficacy against both pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB in individuals aged six years and above.
