Category: Editorial
Title: India faces a moment It needs to reform Part One

India faces a 1991 moment: It needs to reform, relook at subsidies

It needs to reform, relook at subsidies Prime Minister Narendra Modi has called for austerity measures, and some chief ministers have reportedly travelled on motorcycles, metros, and electric cars. Such tokenism does not last long The Indian rupee continues to weaken against the US dollar. If the RBI does not intervene decisively, the exchange rate could well slide to Rs 100 per US dollar.

To stabilise the rupee, the RBI may need a war chest of at least $50 - 60 billion, and even that would provide only temporary relief. The underlying causes of the crisis lie largely beyond the RBI's control. The crisis in the Middle East is finally hitting India pretty hard. Energy and fertiliser costs have almost doubled.

The recent increase in petrol prices by around Rs 3-4 per litre is only a partial pass-through of global prices. Similar underpricing exists in LPG, LNG, and fertilisers, especially urea. These pressures are likely to widen the fiscal deficit beyond 5 per cent of GDP. Foreign portfolio investors are losing interest in India and withdrawing their investments.

Domestic investors are equally worried and are not coming forward to invest big. The IMD has forecast a strong El Niño. As a result, the Indian economy is losing momentum. Our calculation, based on today's conditions, is that in the current financial year (FY27), India will be lucky to clock 6 per cent GDP growth and contain Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation below 6 per cent.

If the Strait of Hormuz remains closed for another three months, GDP growth will fall below 6 per cent, and CPI inflation will shoot above 6 per cent  -  the upper band of the RBI for inflation control. The RBI will not have much choice but to raise the repo rates soon, triggering the northward movement of all interest rates. The economy seems to be on the brink of a major crisis.

The only rational way to avoid this is to carry out major reforms, similar to those in 1991. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has called for austerity measures, and some chief ministers have reportedly travelled on motorcycles, metros and electric cars. Such tokenism does not last long. After returning from his five-country visit, Modi held a meeting with his cabinet colleagues and asked them to carry out reforms that can save resources, especially energy, narrow down the twin deficits of trade and current account, and restore confidence in India's growth story.

The technical blueprint of economic reforms is not difficult to prepare, but what is required is the political will to undertake such reforms. The culture of distributing freebies, at the central as well as the state level, is now deeply entrenched. That's the biggest hurdle in carrying out structural reforms.

Let us demonstrate with the examples of fertiliser and food subsidies. Take the case of fertilisers first. India imports anywhere from 20 to 25 per cent of its urea requirements. The last import tender showed that the minimum price of urea's landed cost on the west coast would be $935/tonne. But it is being sold at less than $70/tonne to farmers.

How prudent is this? Let the readers judge. But what we know is that such pricing creates a large arbitrage  -  a large amount that is being diverted away from agriculture to other industrial uses in India and also smuggled out to neighbouring countries. Bihar is an interesting example. Government data on fertiliser supply and usage reveal a mismatch.
