Category: Editorial
Title: India AI governance and a voice for the Part Two

India, AI governance, and a voice for the Global South

Stakeholders will convene to discuss how the multilateral and multistakeholder ecosystem can come together to collectively define the rules for the governance of AI. A window for leadership India can use the opportunity to stitch together a fractured AI policy agenda that currently lacks a leader. It remains one of the few countries with the political heft, the technical capacity, and a diverse market to play this role.

Rather than positioning itself merely as a destination for investment or a market for AI, India could reassert a vision of technological development rooted in public purpose, user safety, strategic autonomy, and international cooperation. India should reiterate the need for international norms that empower Global South countries to focus on building local AI ecosystems and fostering innovation, safeguarding users, enhancing regulatory capacity, enabling skilling and developing domestic infrastructure. It should also advance critical debates on competition and consumer protection and ensure economic value accrues within national markets.

Concurrently, India must create pathways for international cooperation on AI within the Global South. The Geneva dialogue is a critical moment for Global South countries to come together to enable enhanced agency and strategic autonomy. This requires developing innovative approaches to pool capacity and resources including cooperation on data, compute, interoperable standards and shared protocols and governance, and strengthening institutional capacity both regulatory and technical across the Global South.

As heterogeneous as the Global South is, it can be a counterweight to the hegemony of Big Tech. India can lead this march to ensure that shared governance norms are created and benefits are shared with the people in the Global South, appropriately protecting them from harm. Jhalak M. Kakkar is Executive Director, Centre for Communication Governance, National Law University Delhi.

Astha Kapoor is the Co-founder and Director of the Aapti Institute
