Category: Editorial
Title: IndiaEU FTA Explained Will European luxury Part Two

India-EU FTA Explained: Will European luxury cars get cheaper in India?

It is worth remembering that for the high-end luxury end of the market, price deductions don't happen simply as a matter of tariff reductions, as the sticker price is often a way to signal the premium positioning of the car. An industry source also said that the Rupee's depreciation compared with the Euro could play spoilsport in imported cars getting cheaper in the near-term. "Rupee depreciated by 19% in 2025 compared with Euro, and this is expected to erode any benefit arising from lower duty import for CBU's in the next couple of years," a senior industry executive said.

A win nonetheless That India and EU have agreed to formalise a trade deal, amid geopolitical headwinds and as the US tiptoes around a FTA with New Delhi, could in itself serve as a strong signal. The FTA between India and EU has reached its conclusion after decades of conversations and negotiations and breakdown of talks. As The Indian Express explained earlier, the first round of India-EU trade talks was initiated in 2007.

By October 2013, New Delhi and Brussels had exchanged offers on tariffs and services, and were focusing on identifying the outlines of a possible agreement for the tricky market-access component of the FTA. The most politically sensitive topic from India's perspective at that time was tariffs on car and car parts. By the time landing-zone negotiations started, Indian elections were looming and Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's government was facing political headwinds.

So, in the case of the automotive segment, which was the dealbreaker last time, there's been quite a lot of play by both sides on the "complementary factors"  - that India is strong in small and cheaper cars and European is strong in bigger vehicles. Written by: Soumyarendra Barik Mature and pragmatic: On India-EU FTA India did well to negotiate a fair deal with the European Union The free trade agreement (FTA) between India and the European Union (EU) is significant not just on account of the sizes of the economies involved, but also because it showcases Indian negotiators' skill and maturity when dealing with a powerful counterparty. India has managed to negotiate favourable terms in each of the previous eight FTAs of the last four years or so, but those were with much smaller economies or groupings.

For context, the other eight FTAs together accounted for about 16% of India's total trade in 2024-25, while the EU itself accounted for nearly 12%. Under the latest deal, the EU will drop tariffs on 99.5% of the items that India exports, with most going down to zero immediately upon implementation. India has given tariff concessions on 97.5% of Europe's exports.

Both sides did well to address issues that were previously intractable. India ensured that strategic agricultural sectors and dairy were excluded from the deal. The EU too managed to exclude several of its sensitive agricultural sectors. What stood out was how the two sides arrived at a workable solution on automobiles.

It had been disagreements over auto and auto parts that had derailed negotiations in 2013. The quota-based system now arrived at not only protects India's domestic manufacturers at the lower end of the price band, but also provides a big opportunity for Europe's luxury carmakers. Similarly, the quota-based wine tariffs not only give French winemakers an opportunity  -  a fervent demand on their part  -  but also provide protections to India's burgeoning domestic industry.
