Category: Editorial
Title: India and Bangladesh must not just renew Part Two

India and Bangladesh must not just renew Ganga Water Treaty. They should reimagine it

Water is an emotive subject and can offer opportunities for the parties in opposition to mobilise resistance from within. Second, shared rivers create indispensable interdependencies  -  a less acknowledged but essential characteristic of transboundary rivers. It is not a zero-sum game when water-sharing considerations accompany those of coping with collective risks.

The negotiations must build on this for an enduring bilateral relationship. The interdependencies may not always be bilateral. They may transcend to become regional in character. Framing it as interdependencies shifts the focus to shared gains. Better management of floods, fisheries, inland navigation for trade, improved flood forecasting, and joint ecological restoration efforts could create benefits that extend beyond questions of water allocation.

Third, an enabling response to the first two is to invest in institutional avenues. Both India and Bangladesh will need to invest in appropriate institutional processes to channel polarised domestic politics in support of negotiations. Bilateral institutions need revisiting as well. Earlier institutional choices of the overarching Joint Rivers Commission and the Joint Committee for implementing the Ganga Treaty will not be adequate.

They were conceived to implement agreements, not to manage uncertainties. The changed realities and greater uncertainties, including water availability, will need robust and resilient transborder institutions to address the enhanced scope of issues  -  water sharing, data collection and monitoring, dispute resolution, responding to risks, etc. Finally, both countries will have to reinvent the political capital that made the 1996 treaty possible, and reinvest in it.

The treaty negotiations can be a means to do it. Alongside Track 1 diplomacy, both countries should encourage Track 2 dialogues to generate ideas, sustain dialogue and build intellectual and political constituencies to support the dialogue. The 1996 treaty benefitted from such engagement. The Centre for Policy Research was among those at the forefront of such initiatives and contributed to developing a working draft of the treaty.

The negotiations can offer an opportunity to revisit the regional vision that India and Bangladesh jointly championed when SAARC was conceived. The institutional form may have to evolve beyond SAARC, but the underlying strategic rationale has become stronger. The next Ganga Treaty, therefore, presents an opportunity not merely to renew a bilateral water-sharing arrangement but to reimagine a regional strategic vision to address challenges of this new age of shared vulnerabilities and fragmented global economy.

Written by: Srinivas Chokkakula The writer is president and chief executive, Centre for Policy Research, New Delhi. Views are personal
