Category: Editorial
Title: Indias diplomatic messaging on Republic Day Part Three

India's diplomatic messaging on Republic Day

After unavoidable interruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021 and 2022, the Republic Day celebrations were resumed with strategic focus. As part of the strategy of reaching out to the West Asian region and prioritising defence and counter-terrorism, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, President of Egypt, was invited in 2023. In 2025, Indonesian President Prabowo Subianto was the chief guest  -  a reminder of the Indian government's diplomatic support of countries that are at the frontline of China's rise as well as the growing importance of the Indo-Pacific region for New Delhi.

Through the invitation to President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen and President of the European Council António Costa for the 2026 Republic Day, India has signalled its intention to deepen economic and strategic engagement with Europe. The political comeback of Donald Trump in the U.S. has brought about the uncertainty in the liberal international order.

The Trump administration's persistent questioning of alliances and partnerships, rejection of multilateral institutions and excessive reliance on transactional approach have all contributed to the erosion of predictability on which many middle powers rely. Even though India has increasingly aligned with the U.S. in the Indo-Pacific, there are visible tensions in areas of trade, immigration, tech restrictions and Pakistan.

Furthermore, the negative influence of President Trump on transatlantic relations has destabilised the Western core, weakening the political and strategic unity that had previously characterised the Atlantic leadership. India faces this moment with both peril and advantage: there is an obvious challenge that comes from dilution of stable relationships while the advantage lies in the potential to skilfully handle the situation to reap material benefits. It is against this background that the 2026 Republic Day invitation becomes diplomatically important.

The choice of leaders from Europe, which itself is looking for strategic independence and trying to overcome post-American uncertainty, is an indication that Indian foreign policy does not need to be committed to Western coherence. Far from it, the country needs to present itself as an independent power that can work with different power centres. The practice of inviting a chief guest in the Republic Day celebrations has become a form of symbolic diplomacy, through which India has been signalling its strategic intention, to reinforce its partnerships and deal with global uncertainties.

India's 2026 Republic Day carries greater importance due to a transforming world order characterised by fears of American retreat and mounting geopolitical rivalries. The event not only confirms constitutional sovereignty but also asserts India's autonomy, self-assurance, and strategic power. Vinay Kaura is an Assistant Professor at the Department of International Affairs and Security Studies of Sardar Patel University of Police, Security and Criminal Justice Rajasthan.

Views expressed are personal
