Category: Editorial
Title: IndiaEU FTA The mother of all deals Part Two

India-EU FTA: The 'mother' of all deals

Minimising carbon emissions is fundamental to the EU's vision of economic security. It is unfair to expect that it will necessarily accept India's domestic price of carbon, as levied through fossil fuel taxes, as a nullifier for exempting CBAM-sensitive Indian exports - steel, aluminium, fertilisers, cement - from being taxed at the border. High carbon prices are the EU's way of disincentivising emissions.

Even if this is not agreed with, the economic security concern driving the idea must be respected. The fine print will also have to be awaited for digital trade rules, especially on whether cross-border free flows of data from India are allowed by the EU. Like the CBAM, this is also an area where the EU red line is noteworthy.

As of now, India is yet to be included among data locations considered secure under the EU's General Data Protection Regulation, notwithstanding its implementation of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act. As these examples indicate, economic security has not been compromised by either India or the EU in reaching the deal. But what is striking is that while not compromising on individual economic securities, both sides were determined to reach a deal.

Such determination stems from the exceptional political will on both sides. The mutual political will, no doubt, has been motivated by the common urge to enhance collective economic security by working with each other. European Council President Antonio Costa's description of the FTA as an important geopolitical stabiliser underlines the collective economic security it is to provide to both sides.

Globally, both the EU and India are trying hard to turn back from the trade dependencies that make them vulnerable to economic coercion by the US and China. The role of a rules-based framework that has the kind of scale that the India-EU FTA has is critical in this strategy. By diversifying with a purpose, both India and the EU can ignore "red eyes" threatening them with random tariffs and export restrictions.

And that is a strong guarantee for collective economic security. Political leaderships in both sides have understood the criticality of enhancing economic securities through the FTA at one of the most geopolitically turbulent junctures in the modern era. Without such understanding, the FTA might still have been left unfinished, fetching it the dubious distinction of being the world's longest negotiated and unfinished trade deal.

The infamy has been avoided by political will and foresight, setting an example for the rest of the world. Don't "mothers" set the best examples? Written by Amitendu Palit Views are personal. The author is Senior Research Fellow and Research Lead (trade and economics), Institute of South Asian Studies, National University of Singapore
