Category: Editorial
Title: India and the EU a fit partnership in a Part Two

India and the EU  -  a fit partnership in a divided world

For the EU, it would offer access to India's defence market, and the opportunity for co-production of defence equipment. For India, it compliments Mr. Modi's 'Make in India' initiative, which aims to transform India into a global manufacturing hub. It would also offer access to European technology and a framework for more joint exercises and coordination in the Indian Ocean.

As a template for the world Finally, on a strategic level, the EU-India partnership could be a model for other nations as they recalibrate and search for new partners. With America's unpredictability and China's continued assertiveness, India and the EU could offer a model of relationship building that respects internal domestic sensitivities, while recognising the need for flexibility and pragmatism. At the heart of this alignment is a shared belief that sovereign choices must remain sovereign, and that neither Beijing, Moscow nor Washington should hold veto power over India or Europe's strategic decisions.

India and the EU have paid the price of over-dependence  -  whether on Russian gas, Chinese markets or American security guarantees. Both also recognise the need for strategic autonomy, which is about enhancing flexibility, reducing over-exposure to or over-dependence on certain countries, and amplifying each other's voices on the global stage. India and the EU have the credibility, the capability and the capital to co-create a new chapter in multilateralism.

If they choose to seize this moment and avoid the trappings of internal bureaucracy, the two sides could help realise a multipolar order that is resilient, equitable and sovereign. Shruti Pandalai is a Fellow at the M.P. Institute for Defense Studies and Analyses based in New Delhi. Rachel Rizzo is a Senior Fellow in the Strategic Studies Programme at the Observer Research Foundation based in New Delhi.

The views expressed are personal
