Category: Editorial
Title: Indias education system needs its next leap Part Two

India's education system needs its next leap

Everyone was apprehensive on whether the re-examination could also be compromised! It was successfully completed. The right query should have been: why the machinery was so careless the first time? The academics and scholars free from ideological constraints should have analysed the situation, brought out a plan of action for the government to consider and implement it in all sincerity.

The government could have called a meeting of the Central Advisory Board on Education: CABE; obtained its inputs and presented to the nation the outlines of risk-free examination system. CABE could come out with instructions on issues like teacher preparation and recruitment, curriculum concerns, center-state relationships, the issues of leadership, and much more. One wishes the concerned organizations seriously plan for the future, devise action plans, and ensure that unscrupulous and uncommitted are dexterously kept miles away from the hierarchy created for the conduct of the exams.

One wishes that the elected representatives of the people realize their obligation to deliberate upon educational issues over and above the party lines. Unfortunately, this is not happening. One wonders whether some senior and seasoned parliamentarians could come together, converge into an informal yet effective Think Tank on Education.

They could seriously scrutinize the implementation of the National Education Policy; the NEP-2020. It could be pointed out that this is the task of the Standing Committee of Parliamentarians, so why suggest another creation? What is being suggested is a self-motivated group that could think on educational improvements as their social, cultural and moral responsibility.

They would be guided by their inner conscience, not by any ideology or politics. One is convinced this a pragmatic suggestion. The NEP-2020 was launched six-years ago in July 2020. Numerous deliberations and unprecedented consultations with the stakeholders clearly established the need for overhauling the education structure in full, 'including its regulation and governance, to create a new system that is aligned with the aspirational goals of 21st century education'.

India has reiterated its commitment to the SDG-4: "ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all". To this the policy adds a very significant rider: "...while building upon India's traditions and value systems". It would be evident to every alert and active person that it fully resonates with the spirit of education for all promised by the Constitution of India.

Are we really true inheritors to it? One major issue that deserves serious attention of the nation is the fast-increasing divide between the Sarkari Schools and the much-sought-after private schools. Gradually, most of the Sarkari Schools have lost their acceptability, and are now patronised only by those unable to afford a private school.

In practice, language learning and the rush for English medium schools remain unresolved. The conditions of teacher education institutions are indeed precarious. While paper leak is a shame, commercialization of teacher education, and also school education, just can't be tolerated for long. Quality and excellence in educational attainments must receive requisite attention and resources.

The decision makers and their opponents must realise it. There is no alternative to a respectful dialogical intent and initiative at the national level. Having observed the education system both at the implementation level as also at the policy formulation level for over six-decades, one simply rues he inability of my generation to adhere to the real spirits clearly contained in the Constitution: socio-economic or cultural background of the learner should never hander his education at any stage.
