Category: Editorial
Title: Indias shipbuilding ambitions can set sail Part One

India's shipbuilding ambitions can set sail with Korea

South Korean partnerships could help accelerate India's ambitions to become a shipbuilding powerhouse In April this year, South Korean President Lee Jae Myung met Prime Minister Narendra Modi in India, his first visit to India and the first by a Korean leader in eight years. The meeting was remarkable in many ways, as it revived high-level political interaction at the leaders' level, resulting in the expansion of partnership in strategic sectors. However, the visit was special for another reason: it paved the way for strong collaboration between India and South Korea in the shipbuilding industry, a strategic sector that India is seeking to revive.

Seoul plugs into India's shipbuilding drive Mr. Lee's visit has given positive momentum to the slowly progressing India-South Korea shipbuilding partnership, as seen in the slew of memoranda of understanding (MoU) and agreements signed during his trip. While the big three of the South Korean shipbuilding industry  -  Samsung Heavy Industries (SHI), HD Korea Shipbuilding & Offshore Engineering, and Hanwha Ocean  -  had already announced their investment plans, partnerships, or interests in India, Mr.

Lee's support reiterates the South Korean government's strategic commitment to shipbuilding collaboration with India. Last year, a subsidiary of Hyundai signed an MoU with Cochin Shipyard Limited and has since announced plans to invest $4 billion in Thoothukudi, Tamil Nadu, to construct a green shipyard. Similarly, SHI has signed a partnership with Swan Defence and Heavy Industries to build ships in India.

These developments showcase India's attractiveness as a shipbuilding destination for global giants. South Korea is also interested in developing a complementary supply chain that includes ancillary industries. For instance, the Korea Marine Equipment Association (KOMEA), which comprises 304 enterprises across ship design, shipbuilding, marine equipment, and ship repair, has opened an office in Mumbai.

This is expected to pave the way for the development of a robust shipbuilding ecosystem in India. Such steps will help foster a shipbuilding cluster encompassing ancillary industries and other critical facilities required for scaling up the sector. Further, these partnerships are expected to provide the Indian shipbuilding industry with much-needed support, including design and engineering expertise as well as production know-how.

This will help India develop human capital and adopt technology at scale, making its shipyards more competitive internationally. In addition, the various MoUs signed between India and South Korea  -  at both the government-to-government and business-to-business levels  -  on workforce development, maritime education, research, and innovation will further strengthen the shipbuilding ecosystem. Together, these efforts could help establish a holistic, cluster-led development model inspired by the success of the city of Ulsan in South Korea.

What has been accomplished in such a short time is commendable, but the task is far from complete. To emerge as a leading shipbuilding nation, India will have to pursue multiple objectives simultaneously. It must support the industry through proactive policy and fiscal measures while also responding effectively to external crises that could disrupt supply chains and affect demand.

The sector will require sustained hand-holding until it becomes self-sufficient and capable of competing globally, particularly with established giants such as China. Fill the gaps There must be a focus on human capital development, policy and fiscal support, and bringing in ancillary industries. India's Maritime Vision 2030 and Maritime Amrit Kaal Vision 2047 clearly state the objective of being among the top 10 shipbuilding nations by 2030 and in the top five by 2047.
