Category: Editorial
Title: Indias diplomatic messaging on Republic Day Part One

India's diplomatic messaging on Republic Day

The practice of inviting a chief guest at the parade in New Delhi has become a form of symbolic diplomacy, through which India has been signalling its strategic intention, to reinforce its partnerships and deal with global uncertainties With India inviting the European Union leadership as chief guests at the Republic Day celebration in New Delhi in 2026, the national event has garnered much attention. The practice of inviting a foreign head of state or government as the chief guest elevates the significance of the event beyond India's borders. This sophisticated form of symbolic diplomacy began with Indonesian President Sukarno in 1950.

The presence of a foreign dignitary together with the Indian political leadership has continued to serve New Delhi's geopolitical agenda since it is one of the most visible communicative idioms of the country's diplomatic priorities and strategic direction. The pomp and ceremony of Republic Day seem to have acquired a significantly higher diplomatic weight since Narendra Modi took over as Prime Minister in 2014. Symbolism has become a major tool in communicating India's strategic autonomy and policy preferences, while strengthening its position as an adaptable middle-power capable of interacting with a rapidly changing world on its own terms.

Symbolic diplomacy using national ceremonies is relevant for countries that are keen on enhancing their global image without using military power or economic coercion as their only means. In a world where power often plays overt and violent roles, symbolic gestures are the means to influence the shaping of perceptions, narratives and preferences in the most delicate ways possible. Joseph Nye's idea of "soft power" is the one that perfectly corresponds with this understanding as it points towards the state's ability to attract other nations and convince its positions through the means of legitimacy, values, and imagery rather than brute force.

National ceremonies, especially the ones with profound historical, cultural or constitutional significance, are the most powerful occasions for diplomatic symbolism. Magnifying influence Middle-power countries such as Canada, Australia, Brazil, Japan, Norway, South Africa, Turkey, and India often resort to symbolic diplomacy to compensate for some structural limitations on military hard-power capabilities. These countries rely on different forms of ceremonial diplomacy to magnify their influence and presence in global arena that includes multilateral engagement, niche leadership in specific policy areas, and informing the world of their values (normative signalling) not only to set global agendas but also to have their credibility recognised beyond the limits of their economic or military power.

So, these countries make use of symbolic actions as part of their diplomatic toolkit, confirming their position as responsible and influential actors in the international system. The Republic Day celebration, therefore, comes out as a powerful example of India's middle-power diplomacy. During the Cold War era, selection of the chief guests was straightforward in terms of the diplomatic symbolism behind it.

By predominantly inviting the leaders of the newly independent post-colonial countries, India was constantly highlighting its non-alignment policy and the self-image as a principled country championing national Independence. The occasional presence of leaders of Western countries, particularly from Britain and France, was indicative of a diplomatic approach that sought to balance ideological and strategic considerations. However, the presence of Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser at the 1979 Republic Day, at the invitation of the Morarji Desai government during his nine-day visit to India, was extraordinary as Australia itself observes January 26 as its National Day.
