Category: Editorial
Title: Indias demographic distress Training workers Part Two

India's demographic distress: Training workers is valuable only if the economy generates sufficient demand for their labour

Its technical education system also expanded in line with industrial demand. India's emphasis on elite higher education created islands of excellence but left millions without the basic educational foundation necessary to transition from agriculture into labour-intensive manufacturing. Regressive social norms further complicate the picture.

Caste-coded occupational division of labour marks manual labour as inferior and polluting. Plumbers and electricians, for example, may even earn decent incomes, but their jobs lack the status of say, a clerk. Gender norms also continue to restrict women's educational opportunities and labour force participation.

Manufacturing jobs themselves have become less attractive. Employment increasingly consists of short-term, insecure work with little opportunity for advancement. Earlier generations of workers in manufacturing could often expect stable factory careers, social security benefits and upward mobility through investments in their children's education.

Today, opportunities for advancement within firms are limited, making manufacturing far less appealing to educated workers seeking long-term careers. Technological changes do matter in this regard, but the weakening of labour market institutions that ensured such vertical mobility pathways in the past have a bigger role. The message emerging from India's youth protests is therefore larger than a demand for fool proof examinations or more jobs.

It is a demand to rethink a development strategy that has generated growth without sufficient economic mobility. The need is to address inequality, rebuild mass demand, invest in foundational education, confront social barriers to work, and foster an economy where productive employment becomes the central measure of development. By M Vijayabaskar (The author is a Professor of Madras Institute of Development Studies)
