Category: Editorial
Title: Indias economic prospects after the West Part Two

India's economic prospects after the West Asian crisis'

On the expenditure side, however, subsidies may be higher than budgeted. The RBI has given a dividend of ₹2.69 lakh crore to the Government. This amount covers a significant portion of the budgeted 'Dividends and profits from RBI and Financial Institutions' in 2026-27 at ₹3.16 lakh crore. Given these developments, we expect the 2026-27 budgeted fiscal deficit at 4.3% of GDP to be either realised or only marginally exceeded.

The evolution of India's petroleum economy has been characterised by certain notable features. First, India's dependence on imported crude oil has increased to more than 90% in 2025-26 from 54.9% in 1998-99. Second, the volume of domestic production of crude oil has fallen over time to 26 million metric tons (MMT) in 2025-26 from a peak of 35.9 MMT in 2011-12.

Third, demand for petroleum products/petroleum, oil, and lubricants (PoL) has increased, thereby generating the need for larger imports. Fourth, domestic consumption of PoL products has increased to 243.2 MMT in 2025-26 from 90.6 MMT in 1998-99. Fifth, India has developed an impressive capacity for refining crude to produce various PoL products.

This capacity has improved over time. Sixth, the energy intensity of India's output, as well as the intensity of use of PoL products in GDP, has fallen over time. This augurs well for sustaining an energy-efficient growth at a reasonably high level for a relatively longer period. India may continue to augment its refining capacity, which has helped save refining costs compared to the situation if it had directly imported refined petroleum products.

The trend towards growing dependence on imported crude oil needs to be reversed by emphasising the exploitation of domestic crude resources while accelerating the transition to greener and alternative energy sources, including nuclear power. Build reserves With a lowering of global crude prices and normalisation of supplies, the government should shore up its fertilizer reserves and reserves for other critical primary commodities including crude. There is a need to further diversify sources of imported crude and also reduce reliance on imports through the Strait of Hormuz.

A policy for building strategic reserves of key primary commodities, along with estimates of the required volumes and needed infrastructure, should be put in place. The current account deficit was 0.6% of GDP in 2025-26, with the fourth quarter showing a surplus of 0.7% of GDP. Prospects for 2026-27 indicate a deterioration in this magnitude.

The RBI's June 2026 Survey of Professional Forecasters had estimated a current account deficit of 2.1% of GDP for 2026-27, as per their median estimate. With normalisation of the global oil market and the opening of the Hormuz strait, we expect this to be lower at about 1.5% of GDP. The prospects of the Indian economy outlined above is on the assumption that peace will prevail in West Asia from now on.

If this assumption turns out to be incorrect and if the war continues, India along with many other countries will face an extremely difficult situation. C. Rangarajan is former Chairman, Prime Minister's Economic Advisory Council, and former Governor, Reserve Bank of India; D.K. Srivastava is former Director, Madras School of Economics.
