Category: Editorial
Title: Inside Track Art of deal Part One

Inside Track: Art of deal

We were shell-shocked when Trump unilaterally slapped 25% tariffs on Indian goods, later upped to 50%. Our foreign office appeared to have little inkling of Hurricane Trump hitting our shores. But signs were evident in the aftermath of the Pahalgam terrorist attack. In 2025, foreign policy and trade relations completely trumped domestic events.

Even this columnist, though on unfamiliar territory, has perforce to focus on the all-important issue. Ironically, 2025 began on an optimistic note. "Unlike some, we are not nervous of a Trump-led US administration, there is a convergence of interests," External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar had pronounced in January.

Just months later, we were shell-shocked when Trump unilaterally slapped 25% tariffs on Indian goods, later upped to 50%. Our foreign office appeared to have little inkling of Hurricane Trump hitting our shores. But signs were evident in the aftermath of the Pahalgam terrorist attack. Our old adversary Pakistan, in the form of Field Marshal Asim Munir, outmanoeuvred us with the same agility with which he dispensed with the last vestiges of Pakistan's democracy.

Even before India could retaliate militarily for Pahalgam, Munir hastily tied up a hugely lucrative cryptocurrency deal with a Trump family firm, with the Trump's business partner Zachary Witkoff making a flying visit to Pakistan. Munir was later greeted as an honoured guest by Trump. The US did not protest even when he boasted on its soil of destroying India, strangely comparing Pakistan to a dumpster truck and India to a shining Mercedes.

He won Trump's heart conclusively by announcing he was nominating him for the Nobel Peace Prize for ending the Indo-Pakistan conflict. Flat-footed diplomacy The Indian diplomatic counter to Pakistan was flat-footed, pompous and preachy. One wonders why Modi arrived at Trump's darbar empty-handed. Surely, one of our well-networked billionaires could have accompanied him?

In contrast, Pakistan Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif's companion at the White House was holding a platter of rare-earth minerals, with the far-fetched claim that they were mined from insurgency-ridden Balochistan. Meanwhile, our clueless envoys were at sea in securing an entry into Trump's inner circle, despite the services of highly paid lobbyists. With the MAGA legions targeting Indian immigrants for stealing jobs, the once vocal NRI lobby discreetly disappeared.

A major diplomatic blunder was to repeatedly counter Trump's boast that he had ended the war between nuclear neighbours. To pander to Trump's ego, we could have simply thanked him for bringing Pakistan to its senses; giving credit without compromising our national sovereignty. Modi's move of politely declining an invitation to the White House when he was next door in Canada was universally applauded.

Munir was in Washington and Trump would no doubt have sought to get a photo of the two leaders together, hyphenating the two countries. But the jury is out as to whether the Tianjin summit in August, where Modi meaningfully held hands with Vladimir Putin and our old antagonist Xi Jinping was helpful. It was certainly a powerful statement that India had alternatives.

An infuriated Trump dubbed India's economy as "dead", though the world's fourth largest economy continues to grow at a fast pace. Modi's absence from the Gaza Peace summit was noticeable, even as heads of states from Europe and the Gulf region displayed cringeworthy obeisance to Trump. Liberal Western commentators, for whom Modi has seldom been a favourite, hailed his credibility and independent position.
