Category: Editorial
Title: Institutional reforms vital to become Viksit Part One

Institutional reforms vital to become Viksit Bharat

What we call checks and balances in our system are in fact simply the institutions working at cross purposes with each other So here we are then. Economic Survey done. Budget done. Finance Commission done. Trade deals with the EU and the US done. Earlier, from September till December, other reforms were done.

The government has been doing 'jo uchit samjha'. Can't complain, really, if it's plucked the low hanging fruit and is feeling pleased about it. After all, what are low hanging fruits for? But if you are a government, that too one that's been in power for almost a dozen years, one is entitled to ask if there is a plan to take a crack at the high hanging fruit as well?

Or, to put it differently, if Bharat is to become Viksit Bharat by 2047, hasn't the time come to aim a bit higher? Like, say, at institutional reform, you know, the soft infrastructure of economic growth? Things like administration, policing, contract enforcement, legislative process etc? Why, even the Constitution needs an overhaul, not of its rights articles but of the other ones that prescribe processes of governance.

No other Constitution in the world does this. It's not as if the government, this one and its predecessors, have not recognised the problem of poorly designed institutions in India. But none of them, except ironically, the illegitimate one during the Emergency, has made a recognisably significant attempt at reforming them.

Tinkering is all that they have managed, as the new penal code showed. Which institutions? What we call checks and balances in our system are in fact simply the institutions working at cross purposes with each other. It's this aspect that needs urgent reform if that 2047 goal is to be achieved. In earlier articles I have written about the institutions of public administration like the IAS and other services, or broadly the bureaucracy.

Suffice it to say that the bureaucracy is the operating instrument of government and if it continues to be as colonial and as blunt as it is now, we can read 2147 for 2047. Of equal importance is the matter of contractual obligations. It is an established fact that a market economy can't function properly if contracts are not enforced at all or are badly enforced.

Unfortunately our legal arrangements are not up to the task of efficient enforcement. This is a major impediment to private sector investment. This is especially true when it comes to contracts in which the government is the other party. The latest example is the tax on sovereign gold bonds. The exercise of sovereign power in India is unmindful of the sanctity of contracts.

But it's not the government alone. And the judiciary, too, is to blame for creating a system that can't be trusted to be consistent. Strangely enough even the government is a victim of this caprice but rarely acts to solve the problem before it happens. Currently, its only recourse for undoing the effects of an inconsistent judgment is to change the law.

That takes time. It is possible to quote chapter and verse from judicial decisions that have had a negative impact on the environment for private sector investment. In a nutshell, the judgments have tended to sacrifice efficiency in favour of equity. This has led to a peculiar paradox. The Constitution talks of justice for all but by often confusing justice with equity, the 'for all' part has been given the go-by.
