Category: Editorial
Title: Its time to step up India Bangladesh ties Part One

It's time to step up India, Bangladesh ties

For Bangladesh, better ties with India will help it weather the economic effects of the current Middle East crisis The Middle-East crisis can, in fact, be a boon to India-Bangladesh relations. After the exit of the Muhammad Yunus-led interim administration, anti-India rhetoric has stopped. The newly elected Tarique Rahman government of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) is giving every conceivable signal that it wants to restore ties.

The emerging economic crisis can only pave the ground for better ties. The combined setbacks  -  of the post-Covid supply chain disruption; aggressive monetary tightening by the US, pushing the dollar index to a record high; and the decline in global trade coupled with global inflation following the Ukraine crisis  -  have stalled Bangladesh's decade-long growth story under the Sheikh Hasina government. The economy was showing early signs of stabilisation when Hasina was ousted from power.

As of June 2024, inflation was 9.5 per cent, foreign exchange reserves improved and exports were on a recovery path. Remittances, however, suffered. Bangladesh slipped into a debt-trap during the interim rule. Hasina borrowed to finance infrastructure projects. Yunus cut development expenditure by over 12 per cent yet public debt is up by 13-14 per cent.

Added to this is the widening revenue gap. Dhaka is clearly meeting current expenditure through borrowings. Economic distress As an import-dependent economy, all economic activities in Bangladesh necessarily lead to imports. As of March 2026, private investments are at an 11- year low. Bank credit to the private sector is at a record low.

Suppressed activities kept the forex position artificially stable but created a supply deficit of goods. Inflation is ruling high at 8.5 per cent. It crept up throughout the winter months. To cut a long story short, the Yunus administration's moves to suppress political dissent, coupled with indiscriminate arrests and destruction of Awami League-affiliated businesses, hit the economy hard.

GDP growth was down from 4.22 per cent in 2023-24 to less than 3.5 per cent in 2024-25. Jobs were lost and poverty rose. Bangladesh is now operating at a low equilibrium and may collapse at the slightest external shock. Prime Minister Tarique Rahman has an unenviable task of bringing both social and economic order.

To complicate matters, he has promised the moon to voters. Yunus survived much of the criticism by blaming Hasina but Tarique will not have that advantage. The interim administration signed a one-sided deal with the US three days prior to the election. Tarique's foreign minister  -  who was a key negotiator for Yunus  -  claimed that the pact was reached in consensus with the BNP.

Meanwhile, the patience of voters is running low after three-and-a-half years of economic struggle. The Islamists, who ruled the roost in the Yunus administration, are waiting to capitalise on grievances and capture power. The situation is already tough, and the Iran crisis has made it worse. If the war continues for a few more weeks, it will have a devastating impact on the economy.

Nothing short of a full-scale restoration of India-Bangladesh ties can help Tarique survive the imminent disaster. Remove barriers Removing all barriers to trade and connectivity is an immediate requirement to combat inflation. Bangladesh suffers from high logistics costs. Corruption in the National Board of Revenue (NBR) led the Hasina administration to impose import restrictions through India's North-Eastern gates.
