Category: Editorial
Title: Karnataka bill on hate speech can be used to

Karnataka bill on hate speech can be used to curb citizens' freedoms. It must be scrapped

Can be used to curb citizens' freedoms. It must be scrapped At best, the Bill is a band-aid that avoids a deeper reckoning. In fact, as with so many of its predecessors, it carries the danger of being used to criminalise the very people it seeks to protect Laws that are used to curb the freedom of speech and expression, laws that criminalise what the powers-that-be find offensive or unpalatable, often claim to defend lofty ideals.

For instance, governments of every political hue have a tainted record when it comes to the misuse of the sedition law  -  ostensibly meant to protect national security  -  as well as laws that criminalise "hurting religious sentiments". Special laws, such as the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA) and others like it in various states, have also been used to criminalise dissent. The Karnataka Hate Speech and Hate Crimes (Prevention) Bill, 2025, tabled on Wednesday, claims to "curb and prevent dissemination, publication or promotion of hate speech and crimes, which cause disharmony, hatred in the society".

In effect, it disempowers the citizen vis-a-vis the government. The proposed law defines "hate speech" and "hate crime" in broad and loose terms while proposing stringent punishments. The former "includes any expression which is made, published, or circulated, in words either spoken or written… with an intention to cause injury, disharmony or feelings of enmity or hatred or ill-will against person alive or dead, class or group of persons or community, to meet any prejudicial interest".

For this, offenders can be imprisoned for up to 10 years. The Bill makes exceptions for categories such as artistic expression, academic inquiry and reporting and commentary. In practice, however, these exceptions will be determined in the courts. Given the punishing nature of the criminal justice system, they provide little comfort.

Provisions of the BNS already deal with incitement to violence, hurting religious sentiments and prejudicial speech acts against marginalised groups. Why, then, another law? The Karnataka government is responding with a simplistic, ineffective, and in an open and argumentative democracy, potentially dangerous instrument to what is a complex social and political problem.

Prejudice, othering and polarisation have become all too "normal" in recent years. Unfortunately, the political class has often been a catalyst for these sentiments and has kept social wounds open rather than stanching them. At best, the Bill is a band-aid that avoids a deeper reckoning. In fact, as with so many of its predecessors, it carries the danger of being used to criminalise the very people it seeks to protect.

It must be scrapped.
