Category: Editorial
Title: Kashmir travel advisories affect more than Part Two

Kashmir travel advisories affect more than tourism in the region

Third, the removal of the travel advisory would also signal greater stability within Kashmir, and the likelihood that internet blackouts will reduce over time, as will barriers to the transport of goods from Kashmir to export hubs such as Mumbai. These two factors  -  the internet, and dependable transport  -  form the backbone of any export business by enabling new customer acquisition and timely and predictable fulfilment of contracts. A change in the US advisory will not only impact Kashmir's businesses directly, but could also have a cascading effect.

As Mujtaba Qadri, founder of luxury pashmina brand Me&K, notes, "Lifting negative travel advisories would immensely benefit Kashmir's handicrafts by reconnecting us with global buyers and designers. They need to come here, meet artisans and craft houses, understand the techniques and develop designs together. If the US relaxes its advisory, I believe other Western countries will follow, opening vital new opportunities." Muheet Mehraj says, "Businesses intending to source from Kashmir shall have a lot more confidence, especially because they are not worried about the supply chain.

This shall also help with building the craft sector as more entrepreneurs will have access to investors through this confidence-building exercise." In the past few years, the Indian government has stated several times its desire to "normalise" the situation in Kashmir. Setting aside any questions about the current model of political governance in Kashmir, it would be uncontroversial to state that economic development is the key priority for any long-term plan. The travel advisory of Western nations then has a dual function.

It is symbolic in that it reflects the views of the West about security risks and a lack of trust in governance, but it is real in its economic implications, and it is these that are far more consequential. Whether or not the comments of the US Ambassador were premature, any long-term plan for economic growth in the region must be coupled with the political will to lobby for the removal of the advisory. By Kamini Gupta and Sunil Mitra Kumar Gupta is Senior Lecturer in Business and Society at the King's Business School, King's College London and Mitra Kumar is Reader in Economics, and Director of the King's India Institute, King's College London
