Category: Editorial
Title: Keeping humanity at the centre of the AI Part Two

Keeping humanity at the centre of the AI revolution

The establishment of a global regulatory regime that respects national sovereignty and ensures effective enforcement can no longer be postponed. A moral compass The world of AI that could rewrite the code of humanity, therefore, needs a moral vision that can harmonise technological advancement with the preconditions of a virtuous and happy society. Terry Eagleton's caution in relation to a sense of seductive self-assurance is eloquent and I quote: 'An inflated self-belief can earn its calamitous comeuppance, which caused the ancient Greeks to shudder and look fearfully to the skies'.

Spanish philosopher José Ortega y Gasset reminded us that 'we live at a time when man believes himself fabulously capable of creation, but he does not know what to create. Lord of all things, he is not Lord of himself. He feels lost amid his own abundance. With more means at its disposal, more knowledge, more technique than ever, it turns out that the world today goes the same way as the worst of worlds that have been; it simply drifts'.

The encyclical letter of His Holiness, Pope Leo XIV on 'Safeguarding the Human Person in the Time of Artificial Intelligence', clinches the moral debate on the humanist dilemmas in relation to AI. Recognising that technology is not antagonistic to humanity, the Pope has stressed the duty to remain 'profoundly human' in an era of AI when 'human dignity is threatened by new forms of dehumanization'. Emphasising the need to establish standards of ethical discernment based on the dignity of the individual, His Holiness has warned against the 'illusion' of 'self assertion' and cautioned against progress that exacerbates inequalities and is incapable of healing peoples' wounds.

He has called for a rejection of the 'idolatry of profit that sacrifices the weak, a uniformity that neutralizes differences and the pretense that a single language  -  even a digital one  -  can translate everything, including the mystery of the person into data and performance'. These assertions by the Pontiff are moral injunctions in a world that needed a reminder of the 'splendour and grandeur of humanity' beyond its creations and of the limitations of AI in terms of its 'affective, relational or spiritual capabilities'. The moral code propounded by the Pope, a product of an encounter between lived experiences, spiritual consciousness and historical memory, asserts that humanity flourishes in the 'fragility and finitude' of the human person and in its limitations.

Ethical AI governance Thus viewed in the framework of core human values anchored in the dignity of man, global leaders are expected to opt for a 'humanist centric' approach in the deployment and regulation of AI for the larger good of humanity with the individual at the centre of their decisions. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has stressed at both the VivaTech 2026 conference in Paris (June 2026) and the India-AI Impact Summit 2026 in New Delhi (February 2026) that such an approach would require a robust and enforceable regulatory framework, rather than voluntary and non-binding commitments, to govern the use of AI. Such a framework could democratise access to frontier AI and help build a shared, trustworthy AI ecosystem in an age that 'levels everything and reveres nothing'.

How nations deal with this epochal challenge will define the quality of political leadership and our commitment to inclusive democracy anchored in equality and human dignity as the ultimate civilisational aspiration. Ashwani Kumar is Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India, an author and a former Union Minister for Law and Justice. The views expressed are personal
