Category: Editorial
Title: Lower repo rate link to lending Part Two

Lower repo rate link to lending

While this is the historical context, the trends in the current year need to be examined. The 125-bps cut in repo so far this year has lowered the cost of all retail loans by a similar amount. There was an additional booster for consumption in the form of lower goods and services tax (GST) rates. This did lead to retail loans increasing by almost 14% in October (12.9% last year).

The interesting aspect here is that within this category, auto loans witnessed a higher growth rate, which matches well with the auto sales reported in the festival season and hence will also get reflected in the November numbers. There was, however, a slower growth for home loans by around 100 bps. This calls for an explanation.

Home vs auto loans-Rate cycle impact Any borrower whose interest rate is linked to an external benchmark is aware of the fact that interest would vary with the tenure of the loan. Hence, for a home loan, which is typically repaid in 10-30 years, there will be phases when the rates will go up and others when they go down. Therefore, the feeling of gaining while borrowing at a lower rate does not get converted to a "cost illusion"; which, however, does strike the borrower of a vehicle.

Loans are of a lower tenure, say five-seven years, and the interest rate cycle is expected to normally last for two-three years. Thus, there may not be too many changes in the interest rate cycle during this tenure. This is why home loans would be driven more by other factors too, such as cost of dwelling, future income streams, expectations of interest rate movements, etc.

A loan category susceptible to the highest level of "cost illusion" is unsecured personal loans. Here, the rate of interest tends to be higher due to the absence of any collateral. Those who borrow through this channel have a pressing need, and they are willing to pay this cost. The illusion sets in when the rates are lowered, as there is a feeling that money is coming cheap.

The big push given by the fiscal reforms on income tax and GST should hopefully increase demand and lead to better capacity utilisation as well as investment. This should increase growth in credit to industry - especially large companies. But for acceleration to take place, overall buoyancy in the economy would be required, which is expected in the next two-three years.

Interest rates do affect growth in credit, but may not be the clinching factor as the demand for the end products - which can be machinery, automobile, home, or personal - has to be backed up by consumption. Written by Madan Sabnavis The author is Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda Views are personal
