Category: Editorial
Title: Lower repo rate link to lending Part One

Lower repo rate link to lending

Interest rates do affect growth in credit, but may not be the clinching factor. With the repo rate being lowered by 125 basis points (bps) within this year and bank lending rates coming down, there is strong reason to believe that lending should pick up substantially, according to conventional wisdom. In this context, it is useful to see how the system has reacted in the past to the lowering of the repo rate.

Data for the last 15 years reveals an interesting picture. Growth in credit tended to be the highest when the repo rate was increased. During FY10-12, it averaged 18.8% when the repo rate was increased by 350 bps to 8.5%. In FY19, when the rate was increased from 6 to 6.25%, credit grew by 26.6%. The next highest growth rate was in FY24, when the repo rate was increased by 250 bps as credit grew by 17.8%.

Rate cuts fail to lift credit Reduction in repo rate in phases such as FY13, FY14-18, and FY19-22 did not witness an upsurge in bank credit growth. The last period was during the Covid- 19 phase as banks went all out to provide credit to customers with several schemes also being engineered by the government through the guarantee and targeted repo operations. Yet, growth tended to be sluggish - merely 6.8%.

The answer really lies in demand for credit. Entities borrow money only when there is a necessity. Therefore, a deep dive shows, there have been differential responses across sectors to the repo rate changes. Industry has responded with less alacrity when demand for their products was sluggish, meaning there was spare capacity in several segments.

However, when credit growth was high in periods of high repo rates, it did not matter really as the economy was doing very well and there were fresh capacities planned, especially in the heavy industries for the future. Double-digit growth in credit to industry was witnessed till FY14, after which there was a distinct slowdown, especially after the Reserve Bank of India introduced the asset quality review in the light of high non-performing assets in the banking sector. Not surprisingly, growth in credit to industry (dominated by large corporates) has never crossed the double-digit mark subsequently.

The micro, small, and medium enterprises, however, have witnessed a credit boom due to the myriad policies introduced to channel credit to this segment. It can be concluded that borrowings by industry will be linked to excess capacity in companies and overall demand outlook. While the corporate debt market has become popular in the past five years, more than two-thirds of the issuances (and at times close to 80%) gets accounted for by the financial sector.

It is not that there has been any major migration across markets. The important thing is that spare capacity does not provide an incentive to invest in more machinery, and this also gets reflected in the gross fixed capital formation rates, which have remained around 27-30% since FY15. It was only post-Covid-19 that this rate crossed the 30% mark.

In parallel, an interesting finding is that the retail segment has been more buoyant when it comes to growth in credit, and the response to interest rate changes has been more than commensurate. A double-digit growth rate was consistently maintained through this period, with growth being very impressive post-FY19, when the External Benchmark Lending Rate scheme came in. With retail loans being linked to an external benchmark, any reduction in interest rate has led to higher growth in retail loans.
