Category: Editorial
Title: Madhav Gadgil father of environmental science Part One

Madhav Gadgil  -  father of environmental science

He was clear about democratising forest protection, and about the policies needed to preserve biodiversity The pre-eminent scientist and environmentalist Professor Madhav Gadgil passed away on January 7, 2026, at the age of 83 after a brief illness. As his student, academic colleague and partner in many conservation initiatives, I had a first-hand view of Gadgil's scientific thinking and conservation philosophy over more than four decades of association. In this short tribute, I can only touch upon a fraction of his scientific and conservation legacies to the country and the world at large.

When Gadgil joined the Indian Institute of Science in 1973, armed with a PhD in theoretical biology from Harvard University, he apparently made it clear to the director of the institute that he would devote a great deal of his time to ecological topics in the field; after all, he had gone on birding walks with his father, had already met Salim Ali at a young age and discussed the biology of weaver birds, and had even "toyed" with the idea of doing a doctorate under the great ornithologist! Initially he explored the wildlife of the Nilgiris, but by the time I joined him as a student in 1979, he had set his mind on exploring the complex interactions of people and nature. He gave me, however, a very long rope to study elephants and their conflicts with people, a topic that fitted my desire to research a large animal and his developing interest in human ecology!

Evolutionary approach Given his eclectic scientific interests, Gadgil continued to encourage and support research in a wide range of topics from evolution and social behaviour in insects through wildlife ecology to forest conservation, environmental pollution and the sustainable use of nature, ever since he founded the Centre for Ecological Sciences at IISc in 1983. His scientific legacy to the country is introducing the evolutionary approach to the study of ecology and the environment, attracting a large number of young people into this discipline over the years, and eventually making Bangalore the capital of the ecological sciences. Madhav Gadgil's conservation legacy is even more formidable.

Interestingly, Gadgil's early writings on wildlife conservation leaned more towards the conventional approach of strengthening protected areas in the country as seen from his paper during the 1970s on the need to integrate the management of Bandipur, Nagarahole, Mudumalai and Wyanad cutting across three States into a single Jawahar National Park. I see that as only a passing phase, as from the late 1970s onwards, he set his goals at promoting the sustainable use of biodiversity by placing people at the centre of any serious, long-lasting conservation effort. He championed the cause of biosphere reserves, which promote both biodiversity conservation and development, and I had the privilege of assisting him in designing the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve during the early 1980s.

Fascination for Western Ghats Gadgil was particularly fascinated by the central Western Ghats, and its people cultivating paddy, arecanut and other crops amidst a charming mosaic of hills, streams and humid forest by lopping trees for manure from soppina betta lands assigned by the government or from village forest land. He viewed this as potentially a self-sustaining system of agriculture and forestry, and a testing ground for promoting the prudent use of natural resources while conserving the biodiversity of the region. Much of his energies during the 1980s and 1990s were devoted to field research on human ecology in the Uttara Kannada district.
