Category: Editorial
Title: Madhav Gadgil father of environmental science Part Two

Madhav Gadgil  -  father of environmental science

His engagement with rural and tribal communities in the country also convinced him that they were not necessarily benefitting from traditional knowledge of plant cultivars, biological diversity, their utilisation and conservation. When the West began pushing for countries to sign the International Convention of Biological Diversity (1992), Gadgil began promoting the cause of People's Biodiversity Registers at the level of each panchayat in the country in order to protect their intellectual property rights and to encourage them to sustainably use their natural resources. This eventually led to the framing of India's Biodiversity Act (2002) in which Gadgil played a pivotal role.

Thrust on equity Much like Amartya Sen had brought in concepts of justice and freedom into economic theory, Madhav Gadgil strongly argued for placing equity as central to the conservation of biodiversity. His seminal books This Fissured Land and Ecology and Equity (both co-authored with Ramachandra Guha) graphically document how colonial exploitation of the country's resources and state-sanctioned policies post-Independence had deprived large sections of society legitimate access to land and natural resources, exacerbated inequalities and triggered an environmental crisis. As the issue of historical dispossession and deprivation of the country's large tribal population was close to Gadgil's heart, he also successfully helped steer the Forest Rights Act (2006), a very contentious but much needed correction to historical injustices.

Perhaps his most defining conservation enterprise was chairing the Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel whose 2011 report arguably became the most debated, contested and embraced conservation discourse in the country in recent times. As a member of this panel, I shall only point out one important but largely overlooked aspect of the report. The WGEEP report provided the scientific and ideological framework for the protection of land through the declaration of eco-sensitive areas or zones.

This panel did not draw lines of ESZs on a map of the Western Ghats. Rather, based on geographical priorities indicated in the report, this exercise was meant to be undertaken in a participatory manner by the regional administration along with scientists and panchayat representatives. Madhav Gadgil was not an ivory-tower scientist who rested on his Harvard laurels but took his science and cause to the grassroots as much as to Delhi and New York.

He travelled and trekked across most of the Western Ghats, invoking Kalidasa's poetry to describe a land and people he loved, firm in his support to the cause of tribal people and their knowledge systems, and his belief that nature conservation should be achieved by democratic means. By R Sukumar The writer is National Science Chair at the Indian Institute of Science
