Category: Editorial
Title: Making GIs fashionable and fair Part One

Making GIs fashionable and fair

They are meant to be collective by nature, creating a legal shield for community knowledge and shared skills against their unauthorised use; they also function as a marketing tool in rendering recognition for place-based traditional techniques. But their potential to do justice to tribal artisans is still to be fully tapped August 21 is observed every year as World Fashion Day to celebrate the art and spirit of fashion. The fashion industry draws heavily on traditional arts and crafts for design inspiration.

This can lead to iniquitous outcomes for the indigenous peoples and local communities from whom ideas are taken. A specific kind of intellectual property (IP)  -  Geographical Indications (GIs)  - is considered a legal solution against cultural appropriation. A GI is a name or a sign that identifies goods that come from a particular place and have special qualities or reputation because of their said geography.

It is because of the European Union (EU) that GIs were first inserted in the text of the World Trade Organization (WTO)'s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). WTO requires member countries to provide legal means for GIs. India's Geographical Indications (GI) of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act was legislated in 1999 to comply with the WTO.

The law tags goods, such as agricultural produce and handicrafts or other manufactured products, with specific geographic origin. As of May 2026, a total of 822 GIs are registered in India, which include traditional footwear such as Chamba Chappal from Himachal Pradesh, textile patterns such as the Pochampalli Ikat from Telangana, and several handicrafts made by tribal people. GIs are meant to be collective by nature, creating a legal shield for community knowledge and shared skills against their unauthorised use.

GIs also function as a marketing tool in rendering recognition for place-based traditional techniques helping producers to charge a premium in a market that increasingly cares about authenticity and sustainability. But this protection is not handed out equally. Lopsided global trade architecture The TRIPS Agreement carves out a two-tier system: wines and spirits  - dominated by European exporters  -  that get automatic, robust protection under its Article 23.

Everything else, from local handicrafts to traditional foods that anchor rural economies across Asia, is left with the far weaker safeguard of Article 22. The gap is not an accident  -  it's the product of the lopsided global trade architecture and its IP rules built on structural biases against the developing world. In June 2025, an Italian fashion house known the world over  -  the Prada group -  featured lookalikes of India's Kolhapuri chappal in its show during the Milan Fashion Week in Italy.

The show exhibited male models wearing the footwear on the runway embossed with the word "Prada" as part of its Spring-Summer 2026 Men's Collection. Prada simply termed it "leather footwear" without any credit to the original designers  -  the communities in Karnataka and Maharashtra. A huge debate ensued on whether Prada inappropriately used a traditional cultural expression without acknowledgement.

In July 2025, six advocates initiated public interest litigation petitions at the Bombay High Court seeking action against the Prada group. They sought to prevent Prada from commercialising the unique design of the Kolhapuri chappal without consent of the GI-holders. These petitioners also sought a public apology from Prada, to make them acknowledge the unauthorised use of "Kolhapuri Chappal" GI and expressly recognise the rights of the Indian craftsperson community and compensation to the craftspersons for reputational and economic damages.
