Category: Editorial
Title: Mamdani A message of hope Part Two

Mamdani: A message of hope

Mamdani's triumph at the New York level signals a desire for peaceful, not Trumpian, disruptive change. Over time, he has challenged those Americans who dislike labels like "socialist". At a time when young Americans face downward mobility in the face of liberal capitalism, housing, education, and unaffordable health care costs, job insecurity, and stagnating wages, New York's economy no longer rewards hard work as it once did.

New Yorkers - and Americans - are now re-imagining what fairness looks like and how it might be achieved. Like Sadiq Khan, London's Muslim mayor who has been elected a record-breaking three consecutive times, Mamdani defines himself as a politician who happens to be a Muslim. Like Khan, he asserts that he will be mayor for all citizens of his great city.

Islamophobes like Trump - and in other countries - fail to understand his refusal to be defined by his faith. The pro-Israel lobby condemns him as anti-Semitic; other Jews have supported him. Understandably, he wants to show that he has won by addressing voters' concerns, rather than deceiving them. And that his religion does not make it impossible for him to serve them.

No smooth sailing for Mamdani Mamdani's relationship with Washington is likely to be the most immediate challenge. At the local level, Mamdani must persuade Kathy Hochul, the governor of New York, to raise taxes, She is running for re-election next year and is wary of tax increases that would offend many potential voters statewide. All the more so since Mamdani succeeded with just 50.4% of the vote.

That is a small majority. Trump's favoured candidate, Andrew Cuomo, won 41.6% of votes, and the Republican nominee, Curtis Silwa, 7.1%. Sceptics opine that Mamdani's interpretation of class struggle in the context of law enforcement and public education could create problems with New York's police, who, in recent years, have been able to bring down crime.

Mamdani's team asserts that politics is about "managing a set of obstacles". They could also remember that voters elect politicians to successfully address their problems rather than to create problems that block every possible solution. Those messages resonate worldwide. Citizens and governments of democracies will scrutinise Mamdani's record with great interest.

By By Anita Inder Singh The writer is a founding professor at the Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution, New Delhi
