Category: Editorial
Title: Mamdani A message of hope Part One

Mamdani: A message of hope

New Yorkers - and Americans - are re-imagining what fairness looks like & how it might be achieved What's in a name? In Zohran Mamdani's case, it is a message of hope, not least because he has scarce administrative experience and was elected to the New York state assembly as recently as 2021. Contrary to what many in the Indian media have said, he is the first African citizen and first Muslim to be elected mayor of America's largest city, New York.

His father was a Ugandan citizen of Indian origin, his mother an Indian citizen who took up US citizenship. He was born Ugandan and went to the US as one at the age of seven. His very name - Zohran Kwame Mamdani - reflects a mix of African, Indian, and Muslim origins. He now holds dual Ugandan and US citizenship.

Indians should not claim him as an "Indian" because that has never been his defining citizenship. The US, after all, is a multicultural country and the only one to have viewed itself as a nation of immigrants. Many Ugandans have hailed his electoral win in New York but this is hardly reported in the Indian media.

Moreover, Indians could remember his critique of Narendra Modi for thinking that only a certain kind of Indian is an Indian - to which Delhi has not replied. That said, Mamdani represents a win against the Trump administration which is dividing Americans, cutting down social benefits, forcing a shutdown of government, and cruelly forcing some immigrants to return to dictatorships, where their survival is in question. He has challenged Donald Trump's deployment of the National Guard to clamp down on dissent.

During New York's election campaign, Trump threatened to cut federal funding to the tune of $18 billion for New York's infrastructure projects if Mamdani was elected. In a U-turn of sorts, he has subsequently said he will give the city "a little". Mamdani defines himself as democratic socialist, in a country where "socialism" has long been condemned as a dirty word, identified with everything from the former Soviet dictatorship and sky-high taxes on the rich in democracies.

Promising accessibility and fairness, he has assured New Yorkers of free public transport, higher minimum wages, and expanded social services, including universal child care, city-owned grocery stores, and a rent freeze. How will he finance such programmes? By increasing corporate tax in New York and asking the city's millionaires to pay an additional 2% in income tax to raise money.

Some New York businesspeople have opposed his plans; others have supported them. Mamdani's focus on affordability contributed to his historic win in an election that turned out local voters in the greatest numbers since 1969. Generally, the vote for Mamdani is an anti-establishment vote and has little to do with his ethnic, cultural, or racial origins.

Like Barack Obama, the first "coloured" American president, he impresses on the world that politicians should be defined by their politico-socio-economic beliefs, programmes, and actions. Mamdani's campaign of hope and inclusion has given many voters a good taste of genuinely transformative Democratic politics - which the Clintons, Joe Biden, and Kamala Harris failed to do. The unfortunate result was the victory of Trump, who has committed many illegal acts and is destabilising the US, the world, international law, and the global economy.
