Category: Editorial
Title: Mapping states fiscal health Part Two

Mapping states' fiscal health

It has exceeded 25% of the expenditure on economic services for Gujarat (25.6% due to petroleum & natural gas), Sikkim (28.2% due to forests), Assam (33.7% due to petroleum), Chhattisgarh (37.7% due to minerals), Jharkhand (51.1% due to minerals), Goa (79% due to minerals), and Odisha (87.3% due to minerals). However, if we remove the revenue from minerals, the user charges fall to under 15% for mineral-rich States. The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Act (MGNREGA) and special area programmes are subvention schemes where no recovery could be considered.

But in irrigation, industries, roads, and buildings, maintenance expenses could be recovered. Recovery of user charges for social services has been under 1% for Tripura, Assam, Bihar, Meghalaya, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, and Arunachal Pradesh. It exceeds 5% for Punjab, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Goa and Haryana.

Social services like social security and pension and nutrition support are subvention schemes and no recovery could be expected. But for education above a threshold, health and family welfare, water supply & sanitation, and housing, recovery in some proportion could be considered. Based on these parameters, a composite index for each state has been prepared giving equal weights to every parameter (user charges for social and economic services are treated as a single parameter).

Northeast states usually have a lower index - 50 can be considered as reasonably healthy. Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Haryana, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Telengana, Odisha, and Goa meet this level. The composite index indicates that increasing STRG and improving recovery of user charges are important for states in their journey towards fiscal sustainability.

States could be incentivised to reach a threshold level of this ratio and user charges recovery through FC grants. By R Gopalan & MC Singhi, The authors are former civil servants Disclaimer: The views expressed are the author's own and do not reflect the official policy or position of Financial Express.
