Category: Editorial
Title: Menstrual leave debate What studies say Part Two

Menstrual leave debate: What studies say about women's work productivity, and the way forward

"While productivity studies from across the world imply a loss of roughly nine days a year due to menstruation, this is highly variable depending on the nature of the work and also the individual," Dr Rajeev Jayadevan, convenor of the research cell of the Indian Medical Association, Kerala, said. He added, "The relationship between menstruation and work is complex because it does not affect all women in the same manner. Some are fortunate to have no physical symptoms at all that affect their work, while others suffer from severe dysmenorrhea and heavy bleeding, which compels them to take medical leave." Dr Jayadevan also observed that experienced doctors might be able to diagnose and treat underlying conditions such as endometriosis or fibroids, significantly improving their quality of life and ability to work.

Deprioritising a 'one size fits all' strategy Numerous studies have called for more research on supporting women affected by menstruation-related symptoms and improving their productivity. According to Prof Mookerjea, the issue is further complicated by workplace/industry-specific conditions and depends somewhat on the job description. "Clearly, a college professor has a very different job requirement compared to a bank employee or a person in the service industry.

So, instead of a blanket "one size fits all" leave, organisations should be asked to come up with the best possible solutions which allow women to remain professionally equally productive as their male counterparts," she said. Flexible work-from-home policies could be one solution if the work profile allows for them. Setting up hygienic restroom facilities will also be helpful.

"Since for some women the menstrual periods are regularly accompanied by almost debilitating discomfort due to pre-existing conditions, introducing provisions for additional medical leave on this ground with medical certification will be a step forward," Prof Mookerjea said. Written by: Anuradha Mascarenhas
