Category: Editorial
Title: Mental health of TB patients should not be Part Two

Mental health of TB patients should not be overlooked

Given that TB itself could trigger depression, mental health screening must ideally be done at multiple time points during the TB treatment period. From an individual perspective, being treated for TB and depression at the same time can be a stressful experience. While India's TB programme already provides decentralised access to free anti-TB drugs and financial aid for nutrition, strengthening the availability of drugs to treat depression or anxiety through the district mental health programme is vital.

While antidepressants or antipsychotics can be used alongside anti-TB drugs, clinicians must monitor for any adverse drug reactions or interactions. Psychological interventions, including cognitive-behavioural therapy and participation in peer support groups, can also help reduce isolation. To provide these services, qualified and trained mental health professionals are needed, particularly in rural and tribal areas.

Looking out for everyone Mental health interventions cannot be limited to people with TB. The task of caring for people with TB can place considerable strain on families. Studies in India have shown that up to 80% of caregivers may exhibit high levels of Expressed negative Emotions (EE) and high stress levels due to their caregiving responsibilities.

Often, high EE leads to increased caregiver burden and poorer treatment outcomes. In India's family-centred ecosystem, where most of the caregiving needs are met by family members, this can lead to critical or over-involved caregiving because of emotional, financial, and social strains. Psychoeducation is important not just for persons with TB but also for their families and caregivers.

A blended and syndemic TB-mental health approach that considers mental healthcare as an essential part of TB care, rather than a standalone service, can significantly improve TB outcomes, reduce the burden on caregivers and improve long-term mental health. Dr. R. Thara is Co-Founder and Vice-Chair of the Schizophrenia Research Foundation (SCARF)
