Category: Editorial
Title: MGNREGA gave Indians dignity New job Part One

MGNREGA gave Indians dignity. New job guarantee scheme keeps its core  -  but makes some mistakes

Ity. New job guarantee scheme keeps its core  -  but makes some mistakes That the government has kept this core element in the new rural job guarantee framework and has enhanced the guaranteed days of employment to 125 from 100 is welcome. But, transferring the burden of the scheme's funding to states and pausing employment guarantee during the peak agriculture season are not good ideas President Droupadi Murmu has given her assent to the Viksit Bharat-Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin) Bill (VB-G RAM G), 2025, which was introduced and passed by both Houses of Parliament last week.

It repeals the existing Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee (MGNREG) Act, 2005 and introduces a new rural job guarantee scheme. An objective assessment of the MGNREGA and a fair analysis of the G RAM G Bill are essential as the move concerns the welfare of 8.61 crore families (or 12.16 crore workers). MGNREGA was enacted by the UPA government 20 years ago to provide for the "enhancement of livelihood security" for rural families by providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.

It has served its purpose well. Since its launch, MGNREGS  -  the scheme under the MGNREGA law  -  has generated 4,872.16 crore person-days, with the total expenditure reaching Rs 11,74,692.69 crore till date. The money that flowed to villages boosted rural demand. In the last 10 years, more than 5 crore families availed the programme every year.

This figure crossed the 7 crore in F Y2020- 21 and FY 2021-21, during Covid-19. It became a safety net for migrants who returned to their villages post the lockdown. Before MGNREGA, the country saw several rural employment programmes  - the Rural Manpower Programme (1960s), Crash Scheme for Rural Employment (1971), Jawahar Rozgar Yojana (1989), Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (1999), Employment Assurance Scheme (1993), and Food for Work Programme.

At the state level, there were initiatives, backed by a law, like the Maharashtra Employment Guarantee Act, 1977  -  the first attempt to provide a job guarantee. Despite all those efforts, the situation of rural and agricultural labourers remained grim. There were no fixed wages, no fixed work hours, and no timely payment.

A labourer working in a zamindar's field during kharif season (July-October) would wait till Kartik, the eighth month in the Hindu lunar calendar, falling around October-November, to get her remuneration  -  sometimes in cash but usually in kind (grains). The situation in the rabi season, when the labourers would get their wages at the end of the season in Vaishakha (April-May). Many labourers' hardship would end up being a begaari (work without remuneration).

MGNREGS may not have created durable assets (as claimed by some), but gave an identity to labourers, through its job cards, almost eliminated Begaari, ensured equal pay for male and female, set the floor of wages for unskilled work, and guaranteed payment of wages on time. Above all, it gave dignity to labourers and empowered them to say "no" to the zamindar and thekedaar. By bringing the VB-G RAM G Act 2025, the government too recognises the importance of a rights-based approach in the delivery of welfare programmes.
