Category: Editorial
Title: MGNREGA gave Indians dignity New job Part Two

MGNREGA gave Indians dignity. New job guarantee scheme keeps its core  -  but makes some mistakes

That the government has kept this core element in the new rural job guarantee framework and has enhanced the guaranteed days of employment to 125 from 100 is welcome. But, transferring the burden of the scheme's funding to states and pausing employment guarantee during the peak agriculture season are not good ideas. The Rural Development Ministry has projected the annual spending on the new scheme to be Rs 1,51,282 crore in the first full year post implementation.

It estimates the Centre's share to be Rs 95,692.31 crore, suggesting that states would have to fund the balance of Rs 55,590 crore. According to the VB G RAM G Act, 11 northeastern and hill states will have to foot only 10 per cent of the scheme's expenditure, and the scheme will be fully funded by the Centre in the remaining four Union Territories. Thus, as many as 19 big states will have to share 40 per cent of the scheme's financial burden.

In 2024-25, the total expenditure under the scheme was Rs 1.04 lakh crore. Wages (entirely paid for by the Centre) accounted for Rs 73,337 crore, and the material cost (shared by the Centre and states) was Rs 25,987 crore. While there is no official estimate about the expected fiscal burden on states due to the new scheme, a calculation based on the 2024-25 spending shows that the additional fiscal impact on states (excluding West Bengal) may be about Rs 30,000 crore annually.

Thus, the idea of sharing spending with states may be fiscally prudent for the Centre, but it is certainly not the case for the states, already facing fiscal challenges. To ensure the availability of labour for agriculture, the new Act proposes that guaranteed employment would not be available to rural households for 60 days during peak agricultural seasons. In the past, states have flagged non-availability of labour during peak farm seasons, but the MGNREGS employment pattern shows that the demand for work usually peaks in the month of June.

During three months - September to November - which see harvesting of kharif crops and sowing of rabi crops, the MGNREGS demand usually remains low. This shows that the proposed 60-day pause in employment guarantee may not be a good move to attract labourers to farm work. What is actually holding back labourers is not the MGNREGA but their experience of not receiving full wages or timely payment.

The concept of "normative allocation" also reverses the gains made in the planning process. It rejects the "bottom up" approach of the Labour Budget, which was based on demand, and brings back the "top down" approach in resource allocation. By Harikishan Sharma The writer is senior assistant editor, 'The Indian Express'.

'
