Category: Editorial
Title: MGNREGA overhaul plugs gaps keeps up with Part Two

MGNREGA overhaul plugs gaps, keeps up with changing times

Since inception, around 9.6 crore rural assets have been created, of which a staggering 84 per cent were created during the last decade (FY15-25). The CSS structure, with works focused across four interwoven broader areas of water security, rural infrastructure, livelihood infrastructure and climate resilience -  wherein assets are aggregated and geo-tagged into the Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack and spatially integrated with national systems such as PM Gati Shakti  -  could ensure the harnessing of optimal benefits. An example could be planning grain produce storage godowns near a cluster of roads built under PM Grameen Sadak Yojana that loops into the highway network, ensuring the availability of larger markets beyond a small periphery.

Fifth, the shift to normative funding as opposed to an archaic demand-driven approach ensures that allocation will be state-specific, keeping in mind local parameters and uniquely optimal requirements amidst competing needs. This should reduce the fluctuation in grants to states across years, identifying areas of utmost importance and sharing best practices across states. We have aimed to weave a model similar to how the FC tax devolution is shared by allocating weightage to equity (say, the number of gram panchayats) and efficiency (share of women participating).

The simulation results indicate that most of the states only stand to gain through the central assistance under such normative allocation. Sixth, the 73rd Constitutional Amendment brought in the concept of rural local self-governance through the Panchayati Raj institutions advocating empowerment of grassroots democracy and decentralising power. The changes proposed nudge gram panchayats to be a spirited partner in Viksit Bharat plans, identifying opportunities amidst ground realities and pitching projects that anchor the quest for sustainable and equitable prosperity coupled with trends like newer skillsets, digital awareness and physical connectivity that are rewriting the game playbook.

Seventh, with rural poverty declining significantly in the last decade, we estimate that the share of MGNREGA as an annual expenditure at the overall poverty line across states is on average minimal, at around 10 per cent, indicating that the rural populace's income sources have diversified manifold and thus the discussion of MGNREGA and rural poverty does not serve any much purpose other than intellectual hara-kiri. VB- G RAM G is a big step forward towards ensuring a well-intentioned scheme remains relevant in changing times, bringing accountability, responsibility, transparency, pooling of resources and technological integration that simultaneously benefits the bottom of the pyramid and also the local economy. It can be the lynchpin of a socio-economic renaissance.

Let us not kill this bold idea whose time has just come. By Soumya Kanti Ghosh The writer is member, 16th FC; member, PMEAC; and group chief economic advisor, State Bank of India. Views are personal
