Category: Editorial
Title: Missing piece in pay reform A system to Part Five

Missing piece in pay reform  -  A system to measure performance

HAPs desperately need sufficient, long-term funding while public systems must roll out mobile health units and doorstep delivery of essential services during peak heat to reduce the income penalties that deter access. Colombia has convened a coalition of roughly 50 countries to explore a faster transition away from fossil fuels in a parallel 'climate conference'. India should join it, not least because of the greater access to climate adaptation finance it could afford.

Scaling climate adaptation from policy to grassroots Adaptation can be advanced through coordinated governance, finance and local efforts India is the ninth most climate-vulnerable country globally, with 430 extreme weather events recorded between 1995 and 2024, causing losses of $170 billion and impacting 1.3 billion people. India's Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) for 2031-35 acknowledge these risks and emphasise the mainstreaming of climate resilience and adaptation into the country's development strategy. The updated NDCs strengthen adaptation across coastal resilience, infrastructure, disaster preparedness, heat mitigation, biodiversity conservation and sustainable livelihoods.

This aligns with global commitments to triple adaptation finance by 2035 and the adoption of Belém Adaptation Indicators at COP30. However, achieving these goals will require sustained financing and institutionalising adaptation from national to the grass-root levels. Among key adaptation efforts, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)'s National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) pilot spans 448 villages across 151 climate-vulnerable hotspots and maps risks in 651 districts, focusing on climate-smart agriculture and farmer capacity-building.

A model to watch India's Economic Survey for 2025-26 recognises Tamil Nadu's Climate Resilient Villages (CRV) programme as a good practice. Under the Tamil Nadu Climate Change Mission (TNCCM), with support from the World Resources Institute (WRI) India, the CRV takes a holistic approach across 11 vulnerable districts, in consultation with local communities and administration. Interventions span water management, flood/drought mitigation, waste management, renewable energy, biodiversity conservation, alternate livelihoods and climate information.

Scaling up such models can help build adaptive capacity throughout the country. However, India's efforts towards adaptation have been scattered which makes financing these efforts difficult. While India's Economic Survey 2025-26 estimates adaptation and resilience spending at 5.6% of GDP in FY22, the Union Budget 2026-27 remains skewed toward mitigation.

Financing adaptation action Developing countries face an annual financing gap of $284-$339 billion through 2035, as per the United Nations Environment Programme's (UNEP) Adaptation Gap Report, 2025. As India looks to sharpen its adaptation focus, domestic resource mobilisation will be key  -  requiring a clear typology for adaptation finance (which is prioritisation of sectors and assessment of the resources required for each vulnerable sector). However, India's Draft Framework of Climate Finance Taxonomy (2025) remains largely mitigation-focused and looks at emission avoidance, emission intensity reduction (with possible adaptation co-benefits) and activities supporting transition in hard-to-abate sectors.

It is vital to quantify adaptation benefits such as avoidable losses and socio-economic and environmental benefits including mitigation co-benefits. A WRI study estimates a ten-fold return on adaptation investment, making a case for leveraging private and international investment towards adaptation. Adaptation facilities at the state-level can help identify bankable adaptation projects that map benefits and widen the resource base.

Additionally, domestic public finance should be streamlined by tracking adaptation activities within State budgets, following which the Ministry of Finance can mandate climate budgeting through State Finance Departments. This can be integrated within annual budgetary planning processes through a budget circular. Such a mandate must incorporate timeframes for prioritisation of adaptation action with a monitoring framework.
