Category: Editorial
Title: Missing piece in pay reform A system to Part Six

Missing piece in pay reform  -  A system to measure performance

This should be complemented with cross-department consultative approaches and capacity building at nodal departmental levels. NDCs are expected to be operationalised through a National Adaptation Plan, national missions and State Action Plans on Climate Change (SAPCCs). While most States drafted an initial SAPCC, only a few States submitted revisions in tune with NDC updates until 2030.

Institutionalising planning requires regular climate vulnerability assessments at the State, district, and block levels, integrating socio-economic and livelihood factors. This calls for robust methodologies, updated data, capacity-building, and standardised monitoring, with periodic reviews and continuous data collection. Adaptation strategies should ideally go beyond resilient infrastructure to encompass skill development, alternative livelihoods and guidelines for rehabilitation of affected populations.

This can be done by leveraging existing State and district climate change cells or setting up new functional cells with a dedicated workforce. Clear reporting channels can further support cross-learning and timely interventions. Facilitating locally led adaptation Institutional mechanisms should extend to the level of urban local bodies and panchayati raj institutions to scale adaptation action.

Locally Led Adaptation (LLA) was stressed at COP30. Co-developing resilience planning with communities  -  from planning and implementation to management, ownership, and leadership of needs-based interventions  -  is central to people-centric climate action. Applying place-based and context-specific approaches, such as extending the CRV initiative to different geographies, not only helps raise climate awareness but also enables communities to be a part of decision-making processes.

Preparedness for future climate impacts requires capacity-building and behavioural change across multiple levels. A whole-of-systems approach to adaptation is needed, where national commitments are met through grassroots action. Anjana Rajagopalan & Arivudai Nambi Appadurai are Programme Manager with the Climate Resilience Practice programme at WRI India and Director of the Climate Resilience Practice programme at the World Resources Institute India, respectively.
