Category: Editorial
Title: Missing in NCERT textbook vs Court a Part Two

Missing in NCERT textbook vs Court, a question: How do you talk about justice, corruption to a 13-year-old?

The verdict objects to the inclusion of a section titled "Corruption in the Judiciary" and another one, "Justice delayed is Justice denied". The style of writing throughout the chapter is stiff and flat. This kind of writing is usually found in undergraduate-level textbooks. In textbooks for school-age children, one expects a style that arouses curiosity and motivates readers to explore and reflect.

Writing for children is never easy, but with topics like justice, corruption and delays, the challenge is a lot tougher for several reasons. For children of Piaget's pre-formal stage of intellectual growth, concepts like justice, judicial delay and corruption cannot be treated without denting the idealistic architecture of the adolescent mind. But aren't these children already aware of corruption, a senior lawyer asked me.

He was apparently going by the wide exposure that children of all ages have these days to conversations about bribery and nepotism. Exposure to such vocabulary is of little use to teachers who want to bring conceptual clarity about social, political or legal institutions. In fact, the knowledge derived from desultory sources like social media hampers a teacher's real task  -  cultivating curiosity about contemporary conditions and their impact on institutions.

These conditions also form the context of the preparation and publication of the contested text. Commentators who see a judicial overreach in this case are perhaps unaware of the wider curricular pandemonium that prevails across the system, in both school and higher education. The debate over the textbook under discussion has completely ignored psychological and pedagogic issues.

Imagine a teacher faced with the task of explaining sentences like this one: "Society has many complex interactions happening all the time, both personal and professional." Explaining this to a Sociology undergraduate will also be difficult, let alone to a Class VIII child. Take another example: "As human societies grew larger and more complex systems of governance started emerging." Then there is a section titled "Substantive and Procedural Justice". No matter how qualified a teacher explaining such sentences to 13-year old boys and girls may be, the meaning will remain elusive.

The pedagogic challenge would be no less for an Aristotle or a Panini. They would probably choose a different text to draw their pupil's attention to the idea of justice and its social experience. These renowned teachers had the freedom to teach without a textbook. In our times, many countries give their teachers the freedom to choose a text they want to use.

In our system, textbooks are prescribed and what they contain is used as a basis for examination. Written by: Krishna Kumar Kumar is a former director of NCERT and the author of Thank You, Gandhi
