Category: Editorial
Title: MNREGA was the ground beneath our feet Its Part Two

MNREGA was the ground beneath our feet. It's slipping away

The MGNREGA cut through interminable debates by adopting a self-targeting design: Anyone willing to do the work could demand employment. The social consequences of this design choice were transformative. Nationally, more than 57 per cent of the MGNREGA employment days generated in 2023 accrued to women; in states such as Tamil Nadu, the figure rises to nearly 80 per cent.

Few public policies have so decisively altered gendered patterns of labour force participation at scale. The demand-driven nature of the MGNREGA also made it unusually supple. It could respond to diverse local conditions and shifting economic circumstances across states. Its signalling value, that the state would act as an employer of last resort, was immense.

In principle, the scheme could certainly be improved, for example, by better linking it to skill formation or more durable public asset creation, and by situating it within a changing welfare architecture. Yet many of its apparent shortcomings were deliberate design choices. The gains from simplicity far outweighed the benefits of burdening the programme with multiple, and often conflicting, objectives.

From this perspective, proposals to alter the scheme by allocating work to states on supposedly objective criteria determined by technocrats in NITI Aayog represent a regression in India's administrative architecture. The changes proposed in the new VB-G RAM G Bill largely move in the wrong direction. On the surface, extending the employment guarantee to 125 days appears progressive.

In practice, however, this is likely to be nullified by seasonal pauses, by converting a demand-driven entitlement into a budget-capped, supply-driven programme and by shifting a greater financial burden onto states. The MGNREGA, for all its limitations, was also a significant instrument of decentralisation, empowering gram panchayats in meaningful ways. Although the new Bill formally involves panchayats in planning, the requirement that these plans align with centrally determined priorities will, in practice, hollow out their agency.

The UPA government largely got the policy design right but mishandled the politics of the MGNREGA. Congress lacked the organisational capacity to credibly claim ownership of the scheme's successes, despite its administrative imperfections. In 2014, party leaders compounded this error by projecting the MGNREGA as a ceiling of achievement rather than a floor, allowing Narendra Modi to appropriate the language of aspiration.

From the outset, he successfully framed the MGNREGA as emblematic of a politics of low ambition, an interpretation eagerly amplified by a media ecosystem indifferent to scholarly evidence and reflexively aligned with elite discomfort over higher wages. That this government also displays an instinctive aversion to anything bearing Gandhi's name only reinforced this posture. Yet, viewed over the longer arc of the past two decades, the MGNREGA may come to be seen as more than a relative economic success.

It may well have been the bedrock safety net that underwrote political stability in a period of profound economic and social transformation. Quite literally, it provided the political and economic ground beneath our feet. By Pratap Bhanu Mehta The writer is a contributing editor at The Indian Express
