Category: Editorial
Title: Monetary Policy Why RBI will keep rates Part Two

Monetary Policy: Why RBI will keep rates steady & revise inflation and growth forecasts

Higher current account deficit combined with subdued capital flows outlook, pave the way for a third consecutive balance of payments deficit (in FY27 after FY25- FY26 deficits)  -  a first for the economy, DBS said. The rupee will be vulnerable to further near-term weakness against this backdrop. Domestic inflation is coming off a low starting point base, with FY26 average at 2.0-2.2%, suggesting there is more cushion to absorb the risk of fuel price hikes in FY27, without posing material risk to the upper bound of the target range at 6%.

"With this shock being primarily supply-driven and likely transient, monetary policy might be a blunt and potentially ineffective tool in the short term to arrest inflationary expectations," Rao said. If the ongoing energy shock persists for a few more weeks, the growth drag could begin to outweigh the inflation shock. "This time, it is not just higher oil prices, but also quantity constraints across energy sources, amplified by quota systems and cascading into downstream sectors.

Linear sensitivities from past oil shocks likely underestimate the growth hit. If this persists, it may start to resemble the pandemic more than the 2022 oil shock," said Pranjul Bhandari, Chief India Economist, HSBC Global Investment Research. The RBI lifted its FY26 GDP forecast to 7.4% from an earlier estimate of 7.3% in the February policy review.

It also revised upward the projection for consumer price index (CPI) inflation to 2.1% from 2%. What has changed? The spike in oil prices has led to stress in the financial markets, rise in bond yields and a 2.34 per cent currency depreciation since the war started. Reflecting these risks, implied rates have risen sharply as investors factor in the risk of a tighter policy stance.

Yield on benchmark 10-year bond has crossed the 7 per cent mark amid inflation worries. Globally, a lot has changed since the RBI announced its last policy in February 2026. The crisis in the Middle East has become a point of concern. Energy infrastructure of major oil exporting economies has been damaged.

The Strait of Hormuz is virtually closed. Oil prices continue to hover above $ 100 per barrel and global central banks are preparing for its impact on inflation. The escalation of the US - Iran conflict has triggered a shortage and spike in LPG prices, leading to broad-based input cost inflation across consumption sectors.

Given the high linkage of crude derivatives to packaging, logistics and raw materials, the situation is expected to compress margins, delay demand recovery, and disrupt supply chains, says an Axis Securities report. Foreign investors have pulled out Rs 1.37 lakh crore from the Indian markets in March and April so far, contributing to a decline in foreign exchange reserves. Since the onset of the conflict, India's forex reserves have reportedly dropped by nearly $40 billion.

The policy outlook will, nonetheless, shift from a "benign inflation - strong growth" scenario to a more "cautious balancing act", where the central bank may need to respond to renewed inflationary pressures while sustaining growth, according to Rao. Markets to watch guidance of MPC, Governor As the ongoing conflict in West Asia continues to disrupt global supply chains, shortages of critical inputs and rising uncertainty in international markets have heightened concerns among policymakers and industry stakeholders alike. In this context, the guidance and policy stance of the Governor and the MPC are set to be closely scrutinised, particularly with regard to their assessment of the inflation trajectory.
