Category: Editorial
Title: Monetary Policy Why RBI will keep rates Part One

Monetary Policy: Why RBI will keep rates steady & revise inflation and growth forecasts

Keep rates steady & revise inflation and growth forecasts Globally, a lot has changed since the RBI announced its last policy in February 2026. The crisis in the Middle East has become a point of concern As Reserve Bank of India Governor Sanjay Malhotra prepares to announce the monetary policy on Wednesday (April 8), the economic backdrop has shifted dramatically since the February 2026 review: the West Asia conflict has clouded the economic horizon. Rising crude oil prices and raging conflict now pose fresh challenges, with the potential to push up inflation and place corporate earnings and overall growth under strain due to rising input costs, supply disruption and shortage of raw materials in several sectors.

Given the uncertain economic situation, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the RBI is expected to keep interest rates unchanged for now, analysts say. It will likely take a cautious approach and wait for more data before making any big decisions. However, it may revise its outlook by lowering growth expectations and raising its inflation forecast due to ongoing price pressures and supply issues.

Rate hikes not imminent Analysts and economists do not expect the MPC to hike the Repo rate as retail inflation is still under control. A status quo on the policy rate would provide a major relief to borrowers as their equated monthly instalments (EMIs) on home, vehicle, personal corporate and small business loans are unlikely to change. After the 25 basis points cut in December, the MPC unanimously decided to hold the repo rate  -  the key policy rate  -  unchanged at 5.25 per cent in the February policy review.

"In the context of the stagflationary shock and exogenous nature of the event risk, we expect the RBI to keep rates on hold in April, while addressing specific pockets of strain. We expect a change in the policy stance towards tightness if there are material spillover risks on core inflation and potential second round effects," said Radhika Rao, Senior Economist, DBS Bank. "The RBI is likely to announce its full year growth and inflation forecasts keeping in view the impact of war on India.

The RBI will remain vigilant and hold rates steady for the time being, without changing its stance from neutral," said Sonal Badhan, Economist, Bank of Baroda. "We also believe this to be the end of the rate cut cycle. Further, if oil prices remain above US$ 100 per barrel for a consistently long period of time and inflation breaches the upper tolerance band of RBI (6%), then there might be a chance of rate hike by the central bank towards the end of FY27." Growth, inflation forecasts to be revised Rao said the bank has revised upwards FY27 inflation forecast to 4.6% from previous 4.0%, with an upside risk of 50-60 basis points if crude stays north of $110 this quarter and next.

Real GDP growth forecast has been trimmed to 6.5% from the previous forecast of 7.0% for FY27 as higher inflation will lift the nominal pace but impinge on the real growth rate. We foresee additional if the conflict prolongs or energy prices stay high. A wider energy import bill and subdued demand for goods exports can widen the current account deficit to -1.8% of GDP against the baseline -1.3% of GDP, Rao said.
