Category: Editorial
Title: Myanmars militaryscripted polls Indias Part Two

Myanmar's military-scripted polls, India's strategic bind

Implications for India Myanmar shares a 1,643-kilometre border with four of India's northeastern States, making instability across the frontier inseparable from India's internal security. Violence and state collapse have already triggered refugee inflows into the nation. India currently hosts 90,100 displaced Myanmar nationals in Mizoram and Manipur.

The absence of a coherent national refugee policy places disproportionate burdens on State governments, thus exposing faultlines in this respect. Continued post-election instability is likely to sustain such movements. Indian-backed projects, including the Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport Project and the India-Myanmar-Thailand Trilateral Highway, have faced repeated delays due to insecurity in conflict-affected regions.

The junta's claims of post-election normalisation will be difficult to translate into improved implementation conditions, forcing New Delhi to reassess timelines, risk exposure and engagement strategies. Moreover, transnational security threats  -  for instance, the proliferation of narcotics and human trafficking networks  -  have accelerated amid weakened border controls and fragmented authority. Of particular concern is the rapid expansion of cyber scam centres and cyber slavery networks operating in border conflict zones in Myanmar, from where 2,165 Indians have been rescued since 2022, but more still remain within the shackles.

These developments present emerging non-traditional security challenges, underscoring the need for coordinated and clearer domestic and regional policy responses. The path for New Delhi As western and regional blocs such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) refuse to recognise the election outcomes for now, it becomes essential for India to maintain its balanced approach. New Delhi is likely to sustain limited engagement with the regime in power to protect core interests, while simultaneously maintaining contacts with local actors, which it has already been doing in recent times.

Myanmar's elections have, therefore, not marked a turning point. For India, they underline a hard truth: managing relations with a fractured neighbour will require balancing principles with pragmatism  -  at a time when neither offers an easy exit. Harsh V. Pant is Vice-President, Observer Research Foundation, New Delhi.

Sreeparna Banerjee is Associate Fellow, Neighbourhood Studies, Observer Research Foundation '
