Category: Editorial
Title: Navigating the TrumpPowell feud Part Two

Navigating the Trump-Powell feud

The risks are particularly acute when it comes to central-bank independence, which, despite being crucial to economic well-being, is inherently fragile, owing to the "democratic deficit" associated with granting significant powers to unelected officials. Fortunately, internal and external checks and balances exist to prevent worse outcomes in the US (which helps explain why markets have remained relatively calm). For starters, there is the structure of the policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee.

While the chair is undoubtedly "first among equals", FOMC members vote as individuals. This limits the extent to which the chair could bend the collective will toward political ends. Moreover, the scars from the Great Inflation of the 1970s, which gave rise to the "misery index" (the sum of unemployment and inflation), run deep.

Reining in inflation and re-anchoring inflationary expectations was an extremely painful process, which remains seared into the collective memory of Americans, not least central bankers. It helps that markets today can be both responsive and impactful, as the United Kingdom found out during Liz Truss's volatile 49 days as prime minister in 2022. Governments and central banks must reckon with "bond-market vigilantes", who can effectively walk away from what they perceive as reckless policy.

Even if the feud between the Trump administration and the Fed does not turn out to be catastrophic, the challenge is to transform it into something constructive. Politicians, economists, and market participants should take this opportunity to reaffirm the critical importance of a Fed that is not only independent, but also pursues operational reforms, is held accountable for its performance, and embraces a more strategic policy approach. The first step, however, must be to offer an "off-ramp" for both Trump and Powell.

Given the bargaining chips that each holds, de-escalation appears entirely feasible. Written by Mohamed A El-Erian Practice Professor, Wharton School, and Senior Global Fellow, Lauder Institute, University of Pennsylvania
