Category: Editorial
Title: Need to improve Indias metaeconomic factors Part One

Need to improve India's meta-economic factors

From agriculture to education, there's a need to address design, governance and implementation issues India cannot achieve its 2047 goals without shifting to a new economic model, as it did more than 30 years ago in 1991. However, a new economic model will not be enough. We must recognise that several non-economic factors, called meta-economic factors, affect the functioning and outcomes of any economic model.

Improving our meta-economic factors is essential to speeding up India's economic progress. This truth is often relegated to the background, as governments and analysts tend to focus more on economic policies, which seem more amenable to reform and change. To avoid this problem, here we focus only on meta-economic factors, not economic policies.

First, we need clear allocations of responsibilities. Consider agriculture. Under the Constitution, it is a State subject, not in the Union list. Yet, right from Independence, the Union government has had an agriculture minister. In the last 25 years, the Union government has launched more than 20 schemes aimed at agriculture.

This Union government encroachment reduces the responsibilities of the State governments. And it also makes major agriculture policy reforms difficult. This lack of clarity and responsibility was brought out clearly when the Union government enacted three controversial farm bills in 2020. Strong resistance from some UP, Punjab, and Haryana farmers forced the Centre to repeal the laws.

The Chief Ministers were not in the picture. This confusion about roles is one of the major factors that have held down Indian agriculture, leading to low incomes, low growth rates, and too many people. The time has come for the accountability and responsibility for agriculture to increasingly shift from the Union to the State governments.

Improve governance Second, India needs improved governance. Even sound policies fail to have the needed impact because the implementation is flawed. Or, the policies don't even percolate down to the target beneficiaries. In my talks with young people who have worked in the field, I hear repeatedly that too many people don't even know of some policies designed for them.

They are just on paper. And, when they are implemented, Union and State policies often don't work because they don't take into account India's diversity. Even a single district may have several distinct economic zones, each with its own opportunities and constraints, which uniform policies cannot tackle.

India's large cities suffer from serious problems such as air pollution, water shortages, potholed roads, uncollected garbage, and noise pollution  -  all of which constrain productivity. One of the reasons for these failures is that the metropolitan authorities don't have the necessary authority and funds to do a good job. And, where the Union government could be helpful, as the air pollution in the NCR is a multi-State issue, it plays no role.

In the villages, Panchayati Raj institutions are Constitutional entities. You would think that more than 30 years after they were created, they would have become impactful institutions. Not so. While they have successfully adopted digitalisation, their overall impact remains limited. While their performance varies significantly across States, there are no indications that these institutions are, or will soon be, key players in bringing about rapid economic progress.

They need clearer accountability and resources. Education system Third, India must greatly improve its entire education system  -  in fact, shake it up totally. Poorly educated young people tend not to be future high-productivity workers. India does produce many world-class students, but this is a tiny, non-representative elite.
