Category: Editorial
Title: Need to improve Indias metaeconomic factors Part Two

Need to improve India's meta-economic factors

India's government schools are awful. Low-income parents have voted with their hard-earned money to move their children to private schools. In 1991, about 80 per cent of children were in government schools. Now that incomes have risen, this share has shrunk to about 50 per cent. Parents sacrifice their own comforts to pay their children's school fees.

They can afford only low-fee private schools. The quality of their education is correspondingly low, but still better than that of the average government school. A country with poorly educated students cannot grow rapidly today, as rapid technological change affects most aspects of production. Those who make it to college find that the focus is on rote learning, though some new entities, with high fees, are different.

Infosys' NR Narayana Murthy famously said that weaknesses in the education system mean that most young Indians lack employable skills. The implication is that they will be future low-productivity workers. Most government schools and colleges are operated by State governments, with the Union government mainly running elite institutions.

The Chief Ministers, particularly of lagging States, must devote resources and energy to improve their schools and colleges to increase the skills and productivity of the average student. In conclusion, India's Union and State governments need to build up their design and implementation capacities quickly. This is a daunting challenge  -  it will not happen quickly.

On the other hand, non-profit entities can build their capacity quickly by tapping networks of senior and young people who are keen to move India forward. Further, there is now much more money available in India than even 30 years ago, making it easier for them to secure Indian funds. The agendas of these entities can range from research, as at the famous Indian Institute of Science, founded in 1909, to promoting health/education, and better agricultural practices.

Let them do what governments find difficult to get done. By Subodh Mathur The writer is an economist with extensive practical public policy experience
