Category: Editorial
Title: NEET and pain points in medical education Part Two

NEET and pain points in medical education

Major shortcomings in the quality of medical education include poor pedagogy, low student-teacher ratios, absence of faculty appraisals and subpar faculty competence. This is even as rural health challenges remain serious. An epidemiological transition implies long-term shifts in health and disease patterns and Epidemiological Transition Ratio (ETR) is used to calculate its status.

A high ETR implies a higher burden of communicable diseases and maternal and nutritional conditions compared to chronic diseases. Recent analyses indicate that the ETR value for India is around 36, meaning for every 100 disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) lost to non-communicable diseases, there are 36 DALYs lost to infectious, nutritional, maternal, and perinatal diseases. The top-three States with high ETRs are: Uttar Pradesh at 90 (male, 79 and female, 101), Madhya Pradesh at 69 (male, 71 and female, 67) and Rajasthan also at 69 (male, 64 and female, 74) implying a significant dual burden, especially among females.

Kerala has the lowest ETR at seven (male, nine and female, five) followed by Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh and Telangana, indicating a predominant burden of NCDs. This calls for a meaningful strengthening of comprehensive primary healthcare at the frontlines and greater synergy with medical colleges to support the frontline actors and activities. This is the larger context in which the medical education system and its objectives needs to be viewed.

Govt push and limitations Much of the recent push to create capacity has come through a centrally sponsored scheme  -  Establishment of New Medical Colleges Attached to District Hospitals and the One District One Medical College. This is geared towards setting up new colleges in remote and underserved areas by upgradation of a district hospital where there were no prior government or private medical colleges. The union government is providing a 90:10 support for North-Eastern and special category States and 60:40 for others.

A key arm of this new initiative is the District Residency Programme  -  a three-months compulsory rural posting of postgraduates to strengthen both services and training. Research studies drawing upon real-world experience and perceptions of postgraduates across diverse States such as Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Telangana and Tamil Nadu point to a set of synergistic findings: Less than half of respondents perceiving that the objectives were met; limited clinical exposure and training; and frustration with resource limitations. This needs priority attention.

By Rajib Dasgupta The writer is Professor at the Centre of Social Medicine and Community Health, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi and Former Editor, Indian Journal of Public Health
