Category: Editorial
Title: NEET and pain points in medical education Part One

NEET and pain points in medical education

The system should be equipped to provide comprehensive primary healthcare and bridge the gap between private and public care models The National Eligibility cum Entrance Test - Under Graduate (NEET-UG) has been in the eye of a storm over paper leaks. A high-level committee has been set up to probe the issue and suggest remedial steps. Parliament has passed an amendment to the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024, which stipulates fast track trials and a longer prison term.

However, it is important to situate the debate on reforming medical education in the broader context. There is a supply side (of candidates) and a demand side (the health profile of the population) to the NEET issue. The first is linked to the commercialisation of medical education. This article explores these two dimensions.

To begin with, the NEET-UG is a national level qualifying examination for admission to undergraduate medical, dental, AYUSH programmes with two million or more candidates competing each year. The competition and anxieties are largely around the admission to the MBBS programme, in 450 government and 373 private or trust-managed colleges with a capacity of 129,602 seats and regulated by the National Medical Commission (NMC). The medical colleges of southern and western States have about half the capacity and Uttar Pradesh is among the less-developed States with a large proportion in seats.

NEET-UG is the single largest undergraduate level entrance examination in the country; the success rate for an admission to a medical college is about 4-5 per cent and less than 2 per cent for government colleges. Further, those planning to pursue an MBBS degree abroad (most of them in central and east Asia) need to clear NEET-UG. What fuels the demand for this?

Corporate healthcare One of the factors, besides livelihood concerns, is the revenue and EBITDA growth across major corporate hospital operators  -  upwards of 15 per cent year-on-year driven by high-acuity specialities such as cardiology and oncology. EBITDA margins being in the diagnostics sector is more than 25 per cent currently. Hospital sector mainboard IPOs in India over the last three years have ranged from about ₹ 1 to 10 billion.

The number of doctors is growing currently more rapidly than ever before, fuelled by the lure of corporate medicine. Yet, notwithstanding the policy emphasis on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in general and Universal Health Coverage (UHC), shortage of specialist doctors at community health centres (CHCs) in rural areas has remained fairly constant at 70-80 per cent. Public healthcare What is less recognised here is the role that Centre and States have played in improving decentralised healthcare and creating more doctors and colleges to this end.

There has been a significant closing of shortfalls in the primary health centres (PHCs). Alongside, there has been a rapid doubling of colleges and capacities in the last 12 years with the number of medical colleges up from 387 in 2014 to 844 with a corresponding increase in undergraduate MBBS seats from 51,348 to 139,489. Interestingly, while the number of government colleges exceeded private colleges, 441 vs 382, the capacity was more in the private colleges (73,643 vs 63,296).

Therefore, while the NEET exam attracts a large number of aspirants for a number of reasons, it would be inaccurate to assume that the number of seats has not increased, or that hospital infrastructure has remained unchanged. The problem, in fact, lies in the quality side. While both Union and State governments have focused on accelerating numbers of medical graduates and post-graduates, harnessing numbers and skills in public health service continues to be a challenge.
