Category: Editorial
Title: Nepal A Strategic Opportunity for India Part Three

Nepal: A Strategic Opportunity for India

India has an oil import dependency of over 88 per cent; oil prices have surged to their highest levels since 2022 when Russia invaded Ukraine. Around half of India's crude and LNG imports, and more than 80 per cent of LPG imports, pass through the Strait of Hormuz, which has effectively shut down. India had granted permission to "three ships in the region", Jaishankar said, to dock at Indian ports and one of them, the IRIS Lavan, is currently in Kochi.

This is significant in the context of the sinking of IRIS Dena by the US in the Indian Ocean Region last week, after which the Indian Navy launched search-and-rescue operations. The attack on the Dena bloodied waters close to India, while on the western front, the island of Cyprus came under attack from a Shahed drone believed to have been launched by Hezbollah, Iran's proxy in Lebanon. With neither side showing any indication of stepping back, the war remains dangerous and unpredictable.

New Delhi must oppose attempts to widen the conflict and continue to press for the reinstatement of diplomacy. Social media ban for children may be intrusive and hard to enforce Concerns about grooming, sexual content, addiction, mental health challenges, AI-related harms and misinformation, while all significant, would require different prongs to meaningfully tackle them, as opposed to a sweeping ban On March 6, Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah announced a ban on social media use for children under the age of 16 years during the state's annual budget presentation. In parallel, the Andhra Pradesh government announced intentions to introduce measures to restrict social media access for children below the age of 13.

This comes amid the broader discourse surrounding social media bans and the restriction of children's online access, both globally and in India. Australia set a landmark precedent in 2025 by banning social media use for children under 16. Since then, countries including France, Germany and Indonesia have also expressed plans to ban social media for children, albeit with differing age thresholds.

More recently, French President Emmanuel Macron, during his keynote address at the India AI Impact Summit, urged India to "join the club" and consider banning social media for children. To replicate such a ban in India may pose new challenges, including questions on whether it is a state or the Centre that introduces legal measures, as well as the feasibility of a blanket ban on social media access. While the Andhra Pradesh government has specified that it will introduce regulations to bring the social media ban into effect soon, it is currently unclear how the Karnataka government plans to initiate the ban.

With law-making power relating to internet and communications governance typically falling under the purview of the Central government under the Union List, it is unclear whether states can, in fact, regulate children's access to social media through legislation. Furthermore, fragmented approaches to social media bans can present challenges in applicability and precisely, in the case of non-uniform age thresholds across states. It is also unclear how different states may intend to assign the onus.
