Category: Editorial
Title: New labour codes the threats to informal Part Two

New labour codes, the threats to informal workers

Also notable is the abolition of various cesses as part of the Goods and Services Tax reforms, with no replacement of the cesses collected to provide for the welfare of workers in the beedi, salt, mining and other sectors. This implies that there are no guaranteed funds, raised either from employers in particular sectors or offered by the Union government, to provide for the welfare of informal sector workers. In fact, the SS Code sets up one welfare board for all unorganised workers, with no imagination of the various sectors that informal workers can and do work in, except for construction and gig work.

Even in the construction sector, the implementation of the now-centralised e-Shram registration system creates a possibility for the central government to take over accrued funds raised for workers' welfare  -  estimated to be of the order of ₹1 lakh crore. As is, in Tamil Nadu, the SS Code stands to threaten the dissolution of all existing 39 sector-specific boards established in Tamil Nadu. There are no saving clauses for these State-level welfare boards and the protections they offer, including old age pensions, maternity assistance and educational assistance for workers' children.

This reality, highlighted consistently by unions and worker movements, is perhaps the main reason why Tamil Nadu continues to deliberate on issuing rules for the SS Code. What needs to be done Some States including Andhra Pradesh have closed down their welfare boards in response to the Codes. Tamil Nadu has a strong architecture for workers welfare under the Tamil Nadu Manual Workers Act, 1982, painstakingly built through worker and union demands and advocacy.

It is estimated that there are three crore informal workers in the State, and about two crore workers registered across the various welfare boards. To ensure the welfare of these workers, the State government must protect its welfare boards and State-level labour legislation at all costs. Like Kerala, Tamil Nadu must refuse to implement the codes and notify rules, and, instead, push for saving clauses of existing State-level welfare infrastructure.

R. Geetha is Adviser to the Unorganized Workers Federation (UWF). Priti Narayan is Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of British Columbia
