Category: Editorial
Title: New wine in old bottles Part Two

New wine in old bottles

Countries like the US sent their mined critical minerals to China for processing since they did not want to sully their own environment given that processing is highly energy-intensive and enhances carbon footprints. The US, for sure, must be repenting this policy of the past since it is not in a position to dictate terms to China - unlike with other countries including India. China has been using its dominance to not only counter the US, but has also browbeaten Japan in the past - way back in 2010 - to settle a border dispute by banning exports of some critical minerals temporarily.

It would be good to compare the composition of the MSP with that of the PS. While the PS is a compact body consisting of about nine countries, the MSP has 14 member countries. The new entrants in the PS include Singapore, the Netherlands, Israel, and the UAE. The composition of the PS gives an impression that care has been taken to include those countries which have an edge in research initiatives in AI algorithms, semiconductor design and manufacturing, research and innovation, cybersecurity applications, etc.

The inclusion of the UAE, however, is a little surprising. India was excluded from the PS and there was a lot of speculation as to why this was the case. The fact is that India is not the lone country that was dropped. There are others like Canada, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, and the EU as well.

Therefore, perhaps too much should not be read into India's exclusion. In my view, it is surprising that India was made a member of the MSP to begin with since it has nothing to offer in terms of reserves or technology for processing. India, however, will be a major market where demand for critical minerals and rare earths may grow in leaps and bounds.

The moot point is whether the new body in the form of PS will be able to break the monopoly of China, especially when the latter is one of the leading countries in AI technology. Can AI really help in countering the headstart China has gained over the last three decades? Can AI undo the advantage China has gained today from its rigorous mining and processing of critical minerals and rare earths?

The answer is perhaps no, at least not in the short or even medium term. To that extent, we can safely conclude that the decision to set up PS is nothing but a case of new wine in old bottles. At best, it is a case of optics. By Somit Dasgupta, Visiting Professor, ICRIER Disclaimer: The views expressed are the author's own and do not reflect the official policy or position of Financial Express.
