Category: Editorial
Title: New formula On Formula One and net carbon

New formula: On Formula One and net carbon zero plan

F1 can meet climate targets without losing any of the thrill Formula One (F1) is currently going through a golden period. It is a fact reflected through record race attendances, viewing figures, teams' healthy balance sheets, and soaring valuations. Even on track, the previous seasons have seen exciting battles.

In 2025, the battle for the drivers' title went down to the last race with three drivers in contention. Eventually, McLaren's Lando Norris triumphed ahead of his teammate Oscar Piastri and Red Bull's Max Verstappen, the four-time champion. Now, on the eve of the season-opening Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne, F1 is embarking on a bold trajectory that could define its future.

At a time when there is heightened focus on climate goals and a push towards sustainable living, F1, with its fuel-guzzling machines and a global circus criss-crossing five continents 24 times a year, can be seen as an anachronistic endeavour. In 2019, F1 laid out a plan to become net carbon zero by 2030, and starting this year, it will take its biggest leap towards achieving that goal. The governing body, the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), has introduced a new hybrid engine formula for 2026, split equally between conventional internal combustion engines and electric motors.

More importantly, all cars will be powered by advanced sustainable fuels. These fuels are derived from carbon capture, municipal waste, and non-food biomass rather than from crude oil. The battery for the electric motor will be charged by harvesting energy lost during braking. Historically, major automotive manufacturers have used motorsport as a platform for research and development and have transferred technology from track vehicles to traditional cars.

The new rules have attracted big firms back to the series. Audi has entered its own team; Honda and Ford have returned to the sport as engine partners to Aston Martin and Red Bull Racing, respectively. While these are lofty ambitions, in the end, F1 is still a sport, and the main aim is to produce an exciting championship.

The charm of racing is seeing drivers push cars to their absolute limits and enthral viewers. During pre-season testing, the new cars received a lukewarm response from the drivers, who felt the new formula did not allow them to push the cars to their limits at all times, as they were energy-starved. Though these are early days yet, it will be interesting to see how quickly the teams overcome these challenges or how the rule-makers step in to ensure that the spirit of the sport is not lost.

If F1 can deliver close racing and a competitive championship by this season's end, the gamble may prove worthwhile.
