Category: Editorial
Title: No path to peace On Israels rejection of

No path to peace: On Israel's rejection of peace plan

El's rejection of peace plan Israel's rejection of peace plan shows its intent to subjugate Gaza It has been nearly a year since the U.S.-brokered ceasefire supposedly ended Israel's bombardment and decimation of Gaza. But since the ceasefire, Israel's strikes have killed nearly 1,300 Palestinians and its forces hold about 65% of the Strip, where much of the two-million population lives in tent camps amid rubble with schools and hospitals shut. Aid remains severely restricted, while Israel has blocked reconstruction, insisting that Hamas disarm first.

Yet, when Hamas agreed to decommission and store its heavy weapons in phases, with U.S.- backed Palestinian technocrats in step with a gradual Israeli withdrawal  -  as part of a 15-point road map proposed by the Donald Trump-led "Board of Peace" -  Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu refused to accept this. He said Israel was "ruling out the 15-point document" and that there would be no withdrawal until Hamas gave up "heavy weapons, lighter weapons, all weapons". Israel is keen not only on Hamas's disarmament, but also on the total subjugation of Gaza, at a continuing cost to civilians and children.

It faces genocide proceedings at the International Court of Justice while the International Criminal Court has issued an arrest warrant for Mr. Netanyahu, who also faces a corruption trial still before the courts. By promising the complete destruction of Hamas, he has been trying to stay in power by retaining the support of the jingoistic right wing; any concession on withdrawal would invite political repercussions for his right-wing coalition in elections due in October.

The war on Iran launched by Mr. Trump and Israel on February 28 to effect a regime change has proved to be a disaster, setting off a fuel crisis that has affected several countries. With the Strait of Hormuz barely functioning, rising costs of American petrol and fertilizers have begun to affect the U.S.

economy, leading to Mr Trump seeking a face-saving breakthrough in West Asia. Waning sympathy for Israel as the U.S. mid-term elections approach also explains the Board's proposal. While the farcical Board's vision of a "New Gaza"  -  free-trade zone, privatised infrastructure, no Palestinian representation on the Board  - resembles an attempt at naked profiteering following the disastrous conflict, the 15-point proposal would actually be welcomed by the battered people of Gaza.

For Hamas, which has few cards left, disarmament is an imperative, but must be matched by Israeli withdrawal. Mr Trump and his advisers must ask whether Washington's decades-long Faustian bargain  -  arming and shielding a militarised Israel on Israel's terms  -  is worth continuing, or whether it will use its leverage as Israel's principal arms supplier to compel a genuine withdrawal. It is still not too late.
