Category: Editorial
Title: No shortcuts to hiking health spend to Part One

No shortcuts to hiking health spend to 2.5% of GDP

Of GDP The recent report of the health standing committee that advised benchmarking of hospital rates against hotel prices reiterates the urgency in increasing public spend The benchmarking that the Parliamentary Standing Committee of Health and Family Welfare has done for hospital rooms against three-star hotels is inherently problematic. Healthcare and hospitality are poor parallels because the Supreme Court has interpreted Article 21 of the Constitution to include the right to health and while a person who is not happy with the facilities at hotel X can move to hotel Y with minimal inconvenience, not so for a person seeking medical care for whom shopping for medical care may not be an option. That argument aside, the 176th report of the Standing Committee will make very little difference.

The answer lies within the report  -  the need to raise public health spend to 2.5% of the GDP as envisaged in the 2017 National Health Policy -  and yet unfulfilled. Moreover, recommendations of the committee is not binding on the government. India's government health spend is in the 1.4% range. The 2.5% number has been India's healthcare holy grail for the past few decades with the gap closing at less than snail's pace.

Jugglery of Budget numbers has managed to create headlines, but the fact is the need to reduce dependence on the private sector for healthcare is intrinsically tied to its regulation. If the private sector is spending more on health than the government  -  India's total health spend stands at 3.2-3.4% of the GDP  -  it is inevitable that they will extract the maximum profits. The fact is the gaps in public investment in the healthcare space in India are being filled by modern day usurers  -  private equity funds that give money expecting high returns and extract those returns at grave costs to patients.

While the Clinical Establishments Act has been a poor attempt at regulation, the government's best shot perhaps lies in regulation as a bulk buyer rather than a top-down authority. Court battle The real state of healthcare play in India, meanwhile, is being argued in the Supreme Court where a bunch of petitions both for and against greater regulations for the private sector are being fought. Just a couple of days before the report was tabled, the government, while defending the rules of the Clinical Establishments Act, 2010 that were framed in 2012 in the Supreme Court, had once again taken refuge behind its favourite excuse of "health is a State subject", abdicating any responsibility of implementing the provisions of the Act, which was brought for the express purpose of regulation of the private sector.

It also, importantly, told the court that while the States which have adopted the legislation are willing to enforce the provision for display of rates, they have "consistently conveyed their reservations and challenges concerning the determination of a range of rates". This was the upshot of five State-and Union Territory-level consultations held between March 2024 and March 2026 that happened as per the directions of the top court. In other words, the goose of India's corporate hospital patients had been cooked even before the Standing Committee report had become a public document.
