Category: Editorial
Title: No shortcuts to hiking health spend to Part Two

No shortcuts to hiking health spend to 2.5% of GDP

Status quo it is. The Standing Committee report, in fact, reiterates many of the concerns that triggered the 2010 enactment of the CE Act. The statement of objects and reasons of the Act says: "The private sector health care delivery system in India has remained largely unregulated and uncontrolled. Problems range from inadequate and inappropriate treatment, excessive use of higher technologies, and wasting of scarce resources to serious problems of medical malpractice and negligence." Influx of private equity The committee report, on the other hand, barely touches upon one of the root causes of healthcare inflation that has not left any part of that ecosystem  -  from pharmaceutical companies to insurance providers to hospitals and diagnostics chains  -  untouched.

The sector is witnessing an influx of foreign funding like never before; this is not the boon that it sounds like. Because that also means that clinical decisions that were earlier being taken by treating doctors are being taken in boardrooms in London or New York. Ameerr Shahul's recently released The Silent Syndicate takes the lid off this sordid story.

These are not investors in the strict sense of the word because many do quick exits to capitalise on profits rather than stay for the long term. Terms like EBIDTA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortisation) and ARPOB (average revenue per occupied bed) are brandished freely in hospitals; patient outcomes and disease prevention are almost an afterthought. In many, the original promoters, often doctors inspired by the spirit of service, have been reduced to minority shareholders.

The report barely skims the surface of the issue when it says: "The extreme scarcity and high acquisition cost of institutional land in Tier-I and Tier-II cities (ranging from ₹50 crore to ₹250 crore for five acres in the NCR region), coupled with the absence of priority-sector lending, forces healthcare providers into high-cost commercial financing or private equity, ultimately escalating financial burdens on patients." While in the SC affidavit, the government listed all the healthcare schemes including the Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana and the Jan Ausadhi Yojana, it is an undeniable fact that neither scheme has managed the kind of private participation or spontaneous uptake that can make them game changers in the space. Eight years on, PMJAY still suffers from a lack of public awareness and reluctance of private hospitals to come on board  -  not surprising given the massive pendency of CGHS bills. On the other hand, excessive price consciousness and an effort to limit health benefit packages to interventions that benefit the most patients has limited its impact to the "well begun" stage.

There is poor scrutiny of usage  -  money spent vs health outcomes achieved. What this means is that PE-fuelled corporates may swiftly exhaust the ₹5 lakh per family limit (another five for senior citizens above 70 years) without delivering any real succour. Lack of oversight can make the public exchequer bleed; but in the government system, another layer for oversight can only mean more non-Plan funds eating into the poor health spend.

Abantika Ghosh is a journalist, author, and public policy professional. Her recent book Games Hospitals Play examines healthcare inflation in the private sector
