Category: Editorial
Title: Nothing at all On Sonam Wangchuks release

Nothing at all: On Sonam Wangchuk's release, Ladakh

Wangchuk's release, Ladakh The Centre must negotiate in good faith with Ladakhi leadership Activist Sonam Wangchuk's release on March 14 ended a months-long legal and political standoff between his allies and Ladakh's leadership on one hand and the Centre on the other. Detaining him under the National Security Act 1980, the Centre alleged that he was the "chief provocateur" of the September 2025 violent clashes in Leh that left four dead, and dubbed his presence in the region a catalyst for an "Arab Spring-like" mobilisation to force its hand on Ladakh's constitutional status. The Centre also argued that given Ladakh's borders with China and Pakistan, continued "instigation" by a high-profile figure such as Wangchuk threatened territorial stability.

About six months later, the Ministry of Home Affairs modified its order, intending to create an environment of "peace, stability, and mutual trust" and resume formal talks with the Leh Apex Body (LAB) and the Kargil Democratic Alliance (KDA). But even as a judicial commission was still investigating the September violence, Wangchuk's legal team and his wife Gitanjali Angmo had successfully undermined the government's case. Foremost, the alleged evidence of incitement was a translation of a short speech padded with pages of "aspersions"  -  a legally dubious pattern seen in the Elgar Parishad, Delhi liquor scam, and G.N.

Saibaba cases. His lawyers also pointed to Wangchuk's social media posts condemning the unrest that day. The Supreme Court had also expressed serious concerns over Wangchuk's health in Jodhpur jail. His release came just three days before the Court's final hearing on the matter, letting the Ministry to avoid a potentially embarrassing ruling that could have deemed the detention arbitrary.

But while Wangchuk's release has defused the immediate tension, the political situation remains fundamentally unresolved. Two days on, Leh saw massive rallies for the first time since September 2025, while Kargil observed a shutdown, with local leaders saying that the agitation for constitutional safeguards would continue. Talks between Ladakh bodies and the Ministry have however been inconclusive, with LAB and the KDA reiterating their demands for statehood and Sixth Schedule status  -  already recommended by the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes and promised in the BJP's 2020 election manifesto.

Crucially, other activists, including Deldan Namgyal and Smanla Dorjey, remain in detention. In effect, what Wangchuk's detention was meant to serve is unclear, beyond allowing the Centre to brandish its heavy hand, worsening his health, and stalling negotiations. Unless the Centre can negotiate in good faith with the Ladakhi leadership and provide concrete timelines, the people of Ladakh will not get their due.
