Category: Editorial
Title: Of pilots and other drivers Part One

Of pilots and other drivers

No one talks about duty time limits for truck and train drivers IndiGo pilots say they are overworked. They probably are. But that's nothing new. Ever since commercial aviation started in the mid-1930s, pilots have been asking for reduced duty time. There have been lots of strikes during this period.

More often than not, airline owners and their managements have had to give in because the cost of a plane on the ground doing nothing for a long period is completely unaffordable. This being so, it is very surprising that the pilots of IndiGo have never struck work. They have at best gone on mass sick leave.

There are around 5,000 of them and even if 10 per cent threatened the management with a proper strike, they'd get what they wanted. IndiGo has over 400 aircraft and can't afford to have a quarter of them sitting on the ground. But the IndiGo story is now old. Only my two-and-a-half-year-old granddaughter is yet to express her views.

Like Gautam Gambhir being blamed for all the ills of Indian cricket, the management of IndiGo is now the target of public ire. But as in his case, some of it is the management's fault. But a lot isn't. The term 'public' in the IndiGo case is misleading. It is minuscule but highly vocal and entitled upper middle class which doesn't have time for other dysfunctionalities and mismanagement like, say, of roads or in the railways.

Both are still quite dangerous. That's why this article is about truck and train drivers. I was a consultant for two decades at the Asian Institute of Transport Development. So I have some idea of the problems that they face. The short point is this: that the drivers of trucks and locos are doubly and triply overworked compared to the pilots.

But who gives a damn? Truckers and train drivers Truck drivers can expect to earn ₹1 lakh annually when they start to about ₹5 lakh when they retire, usually around 45 years of age. Compare this to the pilots. They have 12-14 hour working days. Most of them are barely literate. They spend a lot of time waiting.

They drive in terrible conditions. Their cabins are not air conditioned. The trucks mostly don't have power steering. They have to cope with overloading by the owners and completely unruly traffic conditions. They have to deal with corrupt police and road transport officials. Their owners are usually small truck companies with 3-10 trucks and are very harsh on the people who work for them.

There is, obviously, no job security. The fate of engine drivers isn't much better. It's nearly identical to truck drivers. They also suffer from a lot of physical and mental stress. Their cabins are hot and full of fumes. They tend to be very lonely and their resting facilities are crude. They also suffer from exhaustion resulting from working for extra hours because of staff shortages.

In other words, the lives of truck and train drivers are much worse than that of pilots. But who captures the attention of the government and the media? The economics of it all In the end it all boils down to economics on the one hand and commercial considerations on the other. The economics is that the transport industry has three types of market structure and the commercial bit is the degree of technology intensity.
