Category: Editorial
Title: Oil shocks and the rupee The tricky s Part Two

Oil shocks and the rupee: The tricky 100s

A neutral stance will allow data-based response as required. Rupee: the other 100s But especially when markets are nervous, appropriate communication and guidance is essential. In the February policy there was no clear communication on buying support for G-secs, even though the intent was there. Ten-year G-sec yields rose, disrupting the transmission of rate cuts.

Market concern was since durable liquidity was high, open market operations would not occur. Reassurance was required about specific types of liquidity not just aggregate liquidity. Currently the rupee is under stress. Further implications of the 'market determined but act to prevent excess volatility' position need to be drawn out.

Unabated excess volatility leads to persistent misalignment, such as a real effective exchange rate (REER) that is almost 10 per cent depreciated over its equilibrium level. Research indicates a REER of 100 remains the equilibrium value. A regime that acts against excess volatility also has to counter this.

Rupee depreciation exceeded that of other emerging market (EM) currencies in 2025, but it is continuing to depreciate resulting in severe over-shooting, further raising the cost of oil imports. During global risk-offs EM currencies are subject to sentiment, overreaction and self-fulfilling panics. Over-depreciation, instead of acting as a shock-absorber, only leads to bets placed to profit from more depreciation.

100 can become a focus for a nominal exchange rate that is nearing it. Balance is very important. While in 2024 intervention in foreign exchange (FX) markets was too much, in 2025 it was too little. RBI cannot absorb all market-risk but neither can it leave markets to themselves. In 2013 a hands-off led to a steep depreciation that reversed after a series of intervention, although macro inflation, the current account and fiscal deficit were much worse.

Among the most successful measures were a special FX window for oil imports, increasing overseas borrowing limits for banks and a calming speech by the new governor who proceeded to do much more FX intervention. Closing net open positions worked only temporarily and raising interest rates did not work. During volatile times, especially, the RBI can buy and sell FX to smooth small daily mismatches using their data and knowledge of market microstructure.

The reserves are more than adequate for that, dips have always been made up in time. EMs accumulate reserves precisely to have alternatives for a costly interest rate defence. Moreover, such a defence is not compatible with inflation targeting. It would help to point out that since the 1990s, after large deviations, there always were reversals to a REER of 100.

Working with markets does better than forcing them. Both time-dependent assurance as well as hawkish or laissez faire guidance are dangerous in volatile times. But since markets tend to over-react they can be guided broadly towards the equilibrium real rates that affect activity, preventing persistent misalignment.

FPI is waiting to be confident of reversal before coming back. By Ashima Goyal The writer Professor Emeritus, IGIDR
