Category: Editorial
Title: Oil shocks and the rupee The tricky s Part One

Oil shocks and the rupee: The tricky 100s

The markets seem to be overreacting. Oil prices are unlikely to remain elevated for long, thanks to alternate sources and substitution possibilities The Middle-East war is causing widespread disruption. But for a number of reasons risk may not be as high as Indian markets seem to be pricing in.

There tends to be a knee jerk over-reaction to the impact of global risk-off combined with oil import dependence. This backward looking view neglects many changes. First, international oil prices crossing $100 serves as a red flag. But in real terms the shock is not as large as past recent shocks. Brent at $112 deflated by headline CPI is 57; in June 2022 the deflated value peaked at 71 and stayed high that year, in March 2012 the peak was 130.

Second, there is an above 50 per cent fall in energy intensity since the 1990s with non-fossil fuel sources accounting for 49 per cent of total installed capacity and several green initiatives in place. The power of oil monopolies has fallen. Oil prices are unlikely to stay high because of alternate sources and substitution possibilities.

The impact of oil shocks has reduced worldwide because of these reasons. Third, the starting point is more benign for macro parameters. Some fall in growth and rise in inflation will still be very far from stagflation. Fourth, it is not clear yet how persistent the shock will be but even if it is, as a scorched earth policy destroys oil infrastructure, we have dealt well with larger past shocks.

When the Ukraine conflict started, oil prices stayed high for a year but next year inflation was in the target band, while high growth continued. Indian resilience was due to growing economic diversity and appropriate policy. Our FTAs can be used more intensively for trade diversification including in oil sourcing.

Supply chains are affected, but we have had practice in finding alternatives. The Indian oil basket will change. We may start refining and exporting Iranian and Russian oil to others, reducing shortages. Polycrises playbook If supply disruption persists there is a clear pandemic-Ukraine-playbook to be followed: Counter external shocks as much as possible; keep a moderate liquidity surplus and target support to vulnerable categories but with an automatic sunset clause to prevent perpetual dependence.

There were problems in reversing pandemic-time excess liquidity, and with inflation possibly around the corner liquidity infusions have to be measured. But well-designed support, not tightening, is required in tough times and this worked well in handling recent shocks. We have experience and now just need to apply that consistently.

The government is absorbing much of the current shock, since it may be transient. Counter-cyclical excise cuts limit the pass through to domestic inflation. There is space since the benefit of earlier soft oil prices was not fully passed on to consumers. While pass through must rise if shocks persist, longer term reforms can moderate it if they act to reduce vulnerabilities.

The frontier on substitution and diversification can be pushed. We are surplus in ethanol production and already blending has been mandated; distribution of piped natural gas is being enabled. Power distribution reforms will allow green power generation to be fully utilised. Inefficiencies in our fertilizer policy can be reduced and natural farming promoted.

When crises force through otherwise intractable reforms future outcomes improve. The equilibrium real repo rate will stay positive to anchor inflation expectations but will fall below unity as growth slows. Since currently inflation is low, there is space in this policy for the MPC to pause and watch outcomes.
