Category: Editorial
Title: Oman FTA will help in export markets

Oman FTA will help in export markets' diversification

Oman's opening of its doors to India's services professionals is particularly significant India's recently concluded free trade pact, or Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, with Oman has several takeaways: improved market access to labour intensive exports, mobility for services professionals and a cementing of ties with a country where 7.5 lakh Indians reside and remit $2 billion every year. Improved trade and diplomatic engagement becomes important with a country that is strategically located at the entrance to the Persian Gulf - a geo-political hotspot through which over half of India's crude imports is routed. There is also a larger context at work here - of India working out alternative export destinations to the US in particular, as it seeks to stitch FTAs across the world.

This would help its price elastic, labour intensive exports, which may not account for a very large share in value terms but provide a livelihood to millions. So, numbers may not fully reveal the true import of the FTA with Oman. As a bilateral trade partner, Oman is hardly among the top few  -  as bilateral trade amounts to $10.6 billion in goods and $0.9 billion in services, with a trade surplus of $2.5 billion or so in Oman's favour with respect to goods, and a surplus of $0.5 billion in services in India's favour.

But a scrapping of tariffs on 98 per cent of India's exports, most of which were entering Oman at 5 per cent rates, is expected to provide a fillip to India's textiles, garments, footwear, gems and jewellery, agriculture products and electrical and engineering goods where the MSMEs are dominant. Besides, pharmaceuticals, medical devices and automobiles are expected to gain. This is notwithstanding the fact that the bilateral trade is heavily biased towards petroleum products.

Petroleum products account for 35 per cent of India's exports to Oman, processed minerals another 9 per cent, while basmati rice accounts for just under 4 per cent. Similarly, petroleum products account for nearly 40 per cent of India's imports. Meanwhile, India has dropped tariffs on nearly 78 per cent of its lines, which is expected to lead to cheaper access to a few petrochemical products.

Oman's opening of its doors to India's services professionals is particularly significant. Stay for contractual service suppliers has been extended from 90 days to two years, while the quota for corporate staffers employing their own staff too has been raised. Liberalised entry for medical, taxation and accountancy professionals is another major feature.

Oman's $110 billion economy becomes one country in a patchwork of alternative markets to offset trade turbulence. In fact, India's pitch for more FTAs is also perhaps motivated by the need to secure alternative destinations for its services exports, particularly when they involve movement of professionals  -  given the rise in anti-immigration sentiment across most developed economies. The outreach to Jordan and Ethiopia too should be seen as part of this larger plan to carve out or consolidate regions of influence.
