Category: Editorial
Title: Omissions and commissions

Omissions and commissions

Insurance distribution reforms must be expedited India's insurance sector, the tenth largest globally, has been plagued by low penetration, inordinately high payouts to distributors, mis-selling of policies and poor persistency ratios. The Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha Act, 2025, seeks to introduce reforms, while expanding coverage. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India released a consultation paper last week, taking this agenda forward.

The consultation paper is loaded with data that lays threadbare how insurers are milking a small group of policyholders, without making any effort to grow the market or reach the under-served informal MSME sectors. Large commission payouts are reducing the risk and return pools available to policyholders. While new business premiums grew 28 per cent from FY23 to FY25, total distributor remuneration increased 125 per cent in the same period.

Commissions now account for 27 per cent of first year premium. Many of the policies are opened along with loans from banks and NBFCs, where the commissions can go up to 45 per cent. The regulator is right in suggesting strict steps to check malpractices. The reforms in 2023 had scrapped category-level commission limits, and had instead introduced Expenses of Management framework (which imposed a limit on the overall expenses of insurers, including operational and marketing costs based on gross premiums collected).

But distribution commissions have continued to surge, reaching all-time highs now. The paper is now suggesting a glide path for EoM to move down to 10 per cent in five years for life insurers and to 20 per cent in five years for general insurers. The paper is also suggesting exclusion of reinsurance premium from the EoM calculations, which will further reduce the limits available for each insurer.

Along with curbs on EoM, the paper suggests limits on commissions in each category of life, health, motor and other insurances for first and renewal premiums. The limits suggested vary according to the channel of purchase, and seek to remove commissions from mandatory policies such as third-party motor insurance. Commissions on insurance bundled with loans have been placed at less than 5 per cent.

While these limits appear necessary at present, they can be reviewed after five years and lifted, if the industry exercises restraint and establishes new benchmarks in customer coverage, retention and quality of service. However, category-wise limits may not be ideal as they can erode operational freedom. Effective monitoring and implementation of these rules will, however, be critical.

While the paper proposes cost audits of all insurers and distributors earning commission over ₹100 crore, the IRDAI should set up an audit and surveillance department. Those found non-compliant should face a ban on issuing fresh policies for a certain period. Efforts must also be taken to boost awareness among policyholders.

Policyholder education and protection funds should be utilised well towards this end.
