Category: Editorial
Title: On climate change India has a good story to Part Two

On climate change, India has a good story to tell

We need to work together with our neighbours to monitor the melting of the Himalayan glaciers and impending glacial lake outburst floods which may cause huge damage downstream. Monitoring only our own stretch of the mountains is not enough. Similarly, we need to collaborate with our maritime neighbours to monitor the health of the seas around us, safeguard the mangrove forests to protect our coastal plains and conserve the depleting fish stocks and other marine life.

Regional collaboration to address climate change and ecological challenge needs to be part of our planning. Hydrogen is being billed as the energy source of the future. It is clean energy because the only waste from its use is water. Currently, hydrogen is a byproduct from petrochemical production, so its generation is carbon intensive.

Hydrogen can be produced through electrolysis, but whether this process uses fossil energy or renewable energy will determine how "green" and clean hydrogen can be as a fuel. India's green hydrogen mission holds great promise in meeting the twin challenge of climate change and energy security. One should also underline the role that nuclear energy can play in providing clean power for India's growing economy.

The government has set an ambitious target of 100 GW of nuclear power by 2047, coinciding with the Viksit Bharat target, against the current installed capacity of only 8.8 GW. The Sustainable Harnessing and Advancement of Nuclear Energy for Transforming India (SHANTI) Act of 2025 opens this hitherto sensitive sector to the private sector. It permits up to 49 per cent FDI in nuclear power generation.

It has also amended the liability clause in the existing legislation to bring it in line with international practice. The expectation is that this will allow a large increase in nuclear power capacity through the Small Modular Reactors (SMR) of 200-250 MW capacity which are currently under development and which may provide decentralised and distributed power. The compelling reality is India's energy poverty.

Its annual per capita electricity consumption in India is 1,460 KWh as against a world average of 3,800 KWh. The challenge lies in significantly increasing this consumption but in as ecologically sustainable a manner as possible. The whole suite of policies being deployed by India is impressive and will have lessons for developing countries of the South.

But the world needs to recognise that energy transition from fossil fuels to clean and renewable sources of energy requires resources that are limited in the absence of international support. The transition is also complicated by an unpredictable and constantly disrupted international situation. In these circumstances, India has a good story to tell on climate change.

It is the climate evangelists of the West who have repeatedly retreated from their solemn commitments and tried to shift the burden of climate change action onto the developing world. It is they who must be put in the dock for the peril the world faces. Written by: Shyam Saran The writer is former foreign secretary and was chief negotiator on climate change for India (2007-2010)
