Category: Editorial
Title: On Indias updated climate pledges Part Two

On India's updated climate pledges

Others call for increased generation from renewables as the metric and not installed capacity. Even some sections of opinion that have welcomed the NDCs appear nevertheless to be uncertain on whether these new commitments are genuinely the best that India can make at this time. The cost of going green All the above variants of the "India can (must) do more argument" ignore some critical realities that contextualise India's climate actions.

Given that India's natural energy source is overwhelmingly coal, it is inaccurate to view improvements in emissions efficiency of GDP and the corresponding bending of its emissions trajectory as a "natural" corollary of India's growth story. Priority to electricity from renewable sources comes with significant costs, including backing down readily available and often cheaper or comparably priced coal-based thermal power, further tilting a playing field that privileges renewable energy to sustain our climate commitments. Renewable energy (RE) projects, including utility-scale battery storage, have begun to make their appearance in India's power sector.

But the corresponding scaling up of India's battery storage capacity, required for ensuring the stability of generation even from the proposed 2030 RE targets, will run into a few trillion rupees at least. Part of such expansion would have to be funded by the government, deploying resources that would have been utilised in other sectors. At the very least, the deployment of such large-scale battery systems is not immediately feasible.

The most globally widespread option of energy storage in reverse pumped hydropower systems has a very limited scope in India at present. Additionally, environmental concerns and water needs for competing uses such as irrigation, as well as the regulatory challenges faced by all large hydro projects, are likely to preclude any rapid expansion. Optimistic RE projections, not only in India but even globally, have run into the lack of transmission capacity and the challenges of grid balancing, with the associated costs often omitted when referring to the cost-effectiveness of RE power.

Since, for India, coal is the mainstay of power generation when solar and wind cease, unlike the large-scale gas and hydro available elsewhere, the full utilisation of the available RE capacity will inevitably have to be "curtailed", while adding to the operation and maintenance costs for thermal power operated in this cyclical fashion. These add further to the true cost that India bears for the pursuit of its climate commitments. Improving energy efficiency in other sectors is also being pursued vigorously, including the introduction of mandatory emissions intensity targets in key industries.

The early ramp-up of electric vehicles, while the jump from BSIV to BSVI vehicle emissions standards was just coming into place, was another leap-frog moment, whose cost to the economy must not be underestimated. Since the 26th Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework on Climate Change at Glasgow, every Central government budget has seen a range of initiatives and resource commitment across various aspects of climate mitigation. Indeed, a major knowledge gap today is that while future costs of increased mitigation action are routinely calculated, the cost burden attached to India's mitigation initiatives undertaken so far, in the absence of any significant climate finance, has yet to be estimated in a reliable manner.
