Category: Editorial
Title: On Indias updated climate pledges Part One

On India's updated climate pledges

India's announcement of its revised Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to the Paris Agreement prompts scrutiny of its existing climate mitigation actions and the need to factor in the country's developmental costs alongside those of meeting its climate commitments India's announcement of its revised Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to the Paris Agreement - the term applied to the mitigation and other climate action targets that countries voluntarily commit to under the agreement - represents a considered step forward when India's energy and development policies are encountering serious headwinds. It is clear that the government has opted for continuity and incremental advance with respect to India's earlier NDCs. It is also clearly confident that its commitments will nevertheless be more than adequate in relation to its equitable share of global climate action, in keeping with climate justice and within its expected commitments as a developing nation.

Three climate goals As the press communique after the Cabinet approval of the updated NDCs noted, three specific enhancements have been committed. The first is an increase in the reduction of emissions intensity of its GDP, from 45% below 2005 levels by 2030 to 47% below 2005 levels by 2035. The second is ensuring that 60% of installed capacity for power generation is from non-fossil fuel sources, while the third is the enhancement of forest and tree cover carbon sinks to 3.5  -  4 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent above 2005 levels.

India's climate policies are best understood in the context of its structural constraints as a lower-middle-income developing country, which determine its available choices for climate action. Over the last three decades, these constraints have not substantially changed, which is also why India continues to insist on the relevance of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). But apart from these, given the structure of the Paris Agreement that requires renewed and enhanced commitments to climate mitigation every five years, short-term considerations have also begun to have a considerable weight in the formulation of the NDCs.

The rapid deterioration of the global environment for climate action over the last year has undoubtedly brought this issue to the fore. Enthusiasm for climate action Structural constraints have not, however, dampened enthusiasm for climate action in India, both at the level of the Centre and the State governments. There is a considerable range of activities designed to set India on the path to low-carbon development, drawing significant public and private sector efforts and resources, including electric vehicles, enhancement of energy efficiency, promotion and deployment of non-fossil fuel sources of electricity generation, new technologies such as green hydrogen and, more recently, the active promotion of carbon capture and storage efforts.

But given India's developmental levels today, it is clearly premature for India to convert all such efforts into the significantly more onerous and accountable commitments that are the NDCs, the progress towards which is to be reported every two years in the Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) to the UNFCCC. A section of global and domestic public opinion has raised the issue of the adequacy of India's NDCs relative to a global temperature goal of 1.5 degrees of warming above pre-industrial levels (the more ambitious part of the Paris Agreement's goals). Some have downplayed the new targets, one commentator going so far as to call it "a walk in the park".
