Category: Editorial
Title: Onehorse races are no triumph for democracy Part Two

One-horse races are no triumph for democracy

The outcome is being linked to the Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls (ER), and analysts have presented constituency-wise data showing deletions of electors that exceed the victory margins, suggesting that the result might have been different but for the SIR. That the SIR was unwarranted is established by the inability of the process to identify those "ineligible" in terms of Article 326, which was the Election Commission of India (ECI)'s war cry when it commenced the SIR in Bihar in June 2025. Neither at the end of the Bihar SIR nor for the States in the second round has the ECI released figures on the "ineligible" electors weeded out for not meeting the eligibility conditions under Article 326.

There have, no doubt, been deletions through the SIR, but these pertain to "permanently shifted, dead, or duplicate entries", which could have been removed through the normal revision process mandated before every poll. What had existed in West Bengal was over 60 lakh electors included in the electoral rolls under the "under adjudication" category, with 27.16 lakh of them deleted after a lightning exercise carried out by judicial officers hastily appointed by the Supreme Court of India. Over 700 judicial officers sprinted through a marathon in their "supreme" effort to accomplish the task in a short span of time.

Those whose claims were rejected were asked to appear before non-existent Appellate Tribunals. How, when, and even whether their appeals will be heard is hard to tell, going by the experience of those placed on the doubtful voters (D-voter) list a few years ago in Assam. No official data is in the public domain to indicate whether their voting rights have been restored or whether they remain in limbo.

Soon, the 27 lakh affected in West Bengal may join those "missing in action". The cruel irony is that the ECI excluded Assam from the current SIR process, even though the National Register of Citizens prepared there a few years ago classified over 19 lakh people as "non-citizens", yet their voting rights remain unaffected. A neutrality that faces scrutiny The ECI has invited an indelible taint by engineering a system that made such omission possible under its "superintendence".

What sanctity does its slogan, "No voter to be left behind", hold if 27 lakh electors were treated as jettison? How could the ECI "direct" the use of the illogical "logical discrepancy" tool that created discrepancies of its own? Why did it allow the legitimate functions of the Electoral Registration Officer to be exercised by a system beyond its control?

Why did it announce the election schedule if it was not confident of finalising the electoral rolls on time? Why did it abdicate the legal provision that allowed the existing rolls to remain valid in the case of "under adjudication" electors who could not go through the full process because of a paucity of time? Why did the ECI not seek the Court's permission to defer the schedule when a mandatory process could not be completed?

That the Court did not think it worthwhile to ask the ECI to "carry a little", and was willing to "suspend" the voting rights of 27 lakh electors, is inexplicable and unfortunate. With the gradual fading away of political rivals in the States and at the national level, will we witness more "victories" without a fight because the arena is either bereft of competitors, the challengers are too weak, or the umpire's decisions tilt the balance? Interestingly, the umpire himself would become an "extra" if there were no competition.
