Category: Editorial
Title: Onehorse races are no triumph for democracy Part One

One-horse races are no triumph for democracy

Democracy demands not merely elections, but also meaningful and fair competition There was an industrialist whose company was doing exceptionally well. In a decade since its inception, it captured over 40% of the market share. When I asked him, "Having reached thus far, what do you perceive as your biggest challenge going forward?", he paused for a while, his eyes gazing into the distant future, and replied gravely: "Lack of competition." Ask cricketing legends who have been successful batsmen and they will tell you that their finest innings were those played against formidable bowling attacks, not the centuries scored against minnows.

Even spectators enjoy a seesaw, hard-fought contest more than a tame one-sided affair, even if it involves their favourite player trouncing a neophyte. As in business and sports, competition is the haemoglobin of a democracy. It gives meaning to the precept of "rule by the people" by allowing citizens to "fire" incumbents and choose alternatives, thereby liberating them from the TINA ("there is no alternative") trap.

However, that presupposes the existence of rivals with the capacity to contest, and challengers who aspire to win against the odds because they believe in the fairness of the system. Mandates require genuine contests It is ironic that the rules of the game, as far as elections are concerned, do not consider competition essential to an electoral outcome. Section 53(3) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, provides for "unopposed" winners, which means that competition takes place only when enough players enter the fray.

Otherwise, one can have a contestant but no contest, a winner without a game, and a people's representative without a single vote cast in his favour  -  a walkover "killing" both the game and its spirit. For a player to tout his victory there should have been a contest. For a government to claim legitimacy, the electorate must believe that those elected "earned" (pun unintended) their position through a fair process.

You can win power without a contest; not a mandate. Competition also gives "losers" hope that they can try to win in the future, making them accept fair electoral outcomes. Peaceful transition of power is one of the healthiest achievements of an electoral democracy. Competition and contestation enable differing ideologies and social classes to flourish.

Going by the economic logic of competition breeding efficiency, it would be reasonable to expect political parties to refine their policies as their ideological and electoral failures. Political scientist Robert Dahl referred to a system with high participation but low contestation (like one-party States with high voter turnout) as a "plebiscitary autocracy" rather than a true democracy. However, competition also presupposes a level playing field and a neutral referee to ensure that.

The absence of either tilts the scales against challengers, minimising their chances of success while also denting their morale and undermining the people's confidence. In fact, the partisanship of a referee tends to rob the victor of the sweet taste of success, even if deserved. One might be seeded higher, have played better than the opponent, enjoy spectators' support, and even deserve to win, but if the referee is seen as partial, the triumph appears tainted.

In West Bengal Take the example of the West Bengal Assembly elections. Anti-incumbency could well have influenced the voters' choice, and the winning party may have run an effective campaign for its resounding victory. And yet, its performance stands tarnished by accusations of favouritism against the constitutionally designated umpire mandated to provide the "superintendence, direction, and control" of the electoral process.
