Category: Editorial
Title: Open sesame

Open sesame

Relaxation in NPS exit rules much-needed Despite its good returns, a key reason why the National Pension System (NPS) has not soared in popularity is its rigid withdrawal rules. Under these rules, NPS allowed subscribers to fully close out their accounts only at age 60. On closure, they were required to compulsorily use 40 per cent of their proceeds to buy an annuity.

Withdrawals before age 60 were capped at three times and could be attempted only after a 5-year lock-in. The maximum age limit to stay in the scheme was 70. This battery of rules effectively made the scheme unattractive for subscribers. Therefore, it is good that the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) has heeded market feedback to substantially relax these rules.

PFRDA has made four subscriber-friendly tweaks to NPS exit rules last week. One, subscribers can now fully close their NPS accounts, provided they have completed 15 years with the scheme. This is sensible, given that many employees today aspire for early retirement and would not like to be locked out of their retirement savings until 60.

The 15-year vesting period allows enough time for equity investments to deliver. Two, subscribers can now withdraw 80 per cent of their corpus as lumpsum, with only 20 per cent subject to compulsory annuitisation. This can instantly improve the scheme's popularity with private sector employees. Compulsory annuitisation assumes that the NPS is the only source of retirement savings for employees which is far from the truth.

Moreover, annuity plans are poor choices for retirees because they don't offer inflation-adjusted income, deliver sub-par returns and carry unfriendly surrender terms. In fact, the PFRDA can consider doing away with the 20 per cent annuitisation requirement and allow investors to freely deploy their maturity proceeds, as is the case with Employees Provident Fund and Public Provident Fund. Full withdrawal without annuity has been allowed for NPS balances up to ₹8 lakh.

But for balances between ₹8 lakh and ₹12 lakh, only ₹6 lakh can be withdrawn as lumpsum. Three, subscribers can apply for partial withdrawals at any time without a 5- year lock-in and can make four partial withdrawals instead of three. This is welcome, as NPS balances are after all the subscribers' own savings and emergencies can crop up at any time.

As partial withdrawals are anyway capped at 25 per cent, the cap on number of withdrawals could have been removed. Finally, retirees can stay invested in NPS until age 85 instead of 70, with the option to exit anytime in-between. This will help retirees avoid unnecessary portfolio churn, while allowing compounding of their returns to continue post-retirement.

However, while ushering in much-needed relaxations for private sector employees, government employees have been given the short shrift. The latter, for some reason, are still obligated to tie up 40 per cent of their final proceeds in annuities. Given that government employees have access to the Unified Pension Scheme, this seems superfluous.
