Category: Editorial
Title: Operation Sindoor shone light on challenges

Operation Sindoor shone light on challenges ahead

A year on, it is important to reflect on the lessons from this crucial inflection point in the fight against terrorism. In the days between the horrific attack on civilians in Pahalgam on April 22 last year and the beginning of Operation Sindoor on May 7, a question loomed large over India's strategic establishment. After the surgical strikes (2016) and Balakot attack (2019) raised the costs of sponsoring terrorism for Pakistan, what further deterrence could India offer, short of risking all-out war?

Pulling off a calibrated response in a nuclearised neighbourhood was no easy task. The success of Operation Sindoor erased doubts about India's ability to respond to state-sponsored terrorism. Military and strategic targets were struck by the Indian Air Force, and it was clearly communicated that New Delhi was not the aggressor and the escalations were driven by Rawalpindi.

The entire country and political class  -  from the Omar Abdullah government in Kashmir to the national Opposition  -  stood behind the victims of Pahalgam and the action of the armed forces. A year on, it is important to reflect on the lessons from this crucial inflection point in the fight against terrorism. The Pahalgam attack underscored that intelligence  -  especially human intelligence sources on the ground  -  continues to be the first line of defence against terrorism and insurgency.

That said, one year on, infiltration from across the border remains a fraught challenge. The decision to send multi-party delegations to world capitals to tell India's story after the military operation showed that Delhi understands the power of the narrative. At the same time, it is important to acknowledge Islamabad's current leverage with the Trump administration even if it is limited to an optics  -  even theatrics  -  of convenience.

That frames the challenge as India and the US move ahead, securing partnerships, from defence and technology to trade and investments. Going ahead, for India, two important aspects stand out. Op Sindoor laid bare the growing cooperation between China and Pakistan in defence and intelligence. Delhi must deepen its own ties with like-minded partners to ensure it continues to have the edge not just in the conventional domain, but also in cyber and sub-conventional warfare.

In an age when cheaply manufactured drones can be deployed at short notice, India must also modernise its defence procurement architecture. It needs to be more agile, and partner with the private sector to take advantage of its innovations and resources. On terror and engagement with Pakistan, there must be clear messaging for both domestic and international audiences  -  they now shade into each other  -  without letting troll armies on social media set the tone.

The shibboleths of policy doctrine mustn't come in the way of strategic nimbleness.
