Category: Editorial
Title: Perils of expansive gender provisions in FTAs Part Two

Perils of expansive gender provisions in FTAs

Women empowerment efforts Conversely, if India has made consistent efforts for women's empowerment in consonance with their requirements, which provision of the FTA text would that relate to? In India gender main-streaming can mean: adequate and clean toilets for girls in schools; clean cooking fuel and toilets in homes in the rural areas; access to education and access to some form of financial inclusion. These are the pressing realities of the Indian woman.

Government schemes relating to post and anti-natal care, safe motherhood, children's nutrition, Anganwadis  -  which part of the FTA text could that speak to? If there is strong affirmative action for women's participation in municipal councils, State governing bodies  -  which part of the gender chapter could it speak to? In effect, multi-directional efforts taken by government of India for women's empowerment may hardly be recognised by any FTA, and its effects unaccounted in terms of women's welfare, since it does not directly imply an equal access to the international markets.

International dispute panels The women empowerment agenda is essentially domestic. Any cooperation with any other trading partner in the gender arena is best kept out of contentious and legally binding waters of an FTA, where disputes will be decided by international panels. India's experience with International Arbitration panels is quite instructive.

It cancelled all its 77 Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) in 2015-16. These treaties displayed a stark lack of strategic negotiating capacity. Broad texts signed with investing countries turned into Indian taxpayers forking out billion-dollar state compensation to MNCs, surrender of even apex sovereign functions like taxation.

Equally instructive is South Korea's brush with an arbitration panel in a dispute raised by the EU under their bilateral FTA. The panel brushed aside Korea's submissions that the labour regulation targeted by the EU was not trade related. Korea had to modify its domestic labour laws, affecting its strong auto sector that was targeted by the EU.

EU has now established the office of a Chief Trade Enforcement office, whose sole business is to ensure that commitments taken by partner countries are met. EU companies, industry associations and even NGOs can complain and the CTEO takes action. Gender empowerment can best be served outside FTAs and their business-regulatory pressures.

Upcoming FTA texts must therefore reflect hard-nosed negotiations. Broad, nice sounding texts, on social issues, can only create unpleasant surprises for India and its business community. By Sangeeta Godbole The writer is a former trade negotiator and ex-Indian Revenue Service (IRS)
