Category: Editorial
Title: Perils of expansive gender provisions in FTAs Part One

Perils of expansive gender provisions in FTAs

Taking gender commitments in FTAs with little domestic regulatory and implementing capacity is nothing short of a recipe for disaster With an imminent EU BTIA (Bilateral Trade and Investment Agreement), India must realistically assess the utility of gender provisions in free trade agreements (FTAs). Given EU's emphasis on non-trade areas, entangling ourselves too deep may risk whatever little additional market access we are set to gain. The India-UK FTA has been lauded for its broad commitments on gender.

Chapter 23 of in the India-UK CETA (Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement), on Trade and Gender Equality, is a novelty. For India, this is a first. Such a chapter is included in a few recent FTAs signed by the UK. UK's trade agreements include standalone gender chapters in its EFTA, Australia, Japan and NZ FTAs.

However, except perhaps for New Zealand, gender related provisions outside this chapter are nowhere as broad and comprehensive as with India. The language of the Trade and Gender Equality chapter seems positive and quite harmless at first reading. Mostly cooperation based, best effort, hortatory language with dispute settlement (DS) chapter expressly non-applicable.

However, commitments on gender move into eight other chapters, four of which  - Digital Trade, Financial Services, Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) and Government procurement  -  are themselves subject to dispute settlement. These render the relevant gender provisions squarely into the DS jurisdiction. Make haste slowly For instance, Art 7.5 (8) of the TBT chapter includes a clause with a very specific commitment on incorporating the UNECE Declaration on Gender Responsive Standards in the working of national standard making bodies.

This commitment includes balanced gender representation and leadership in standards-making bodies and mandates collection and analysis of gender-based data with specialised tools. Gender responsive standards are to be framed and implemented based on such gender-based data. The recent QCO (Quality Control Order) drama has demonstrated the distance Indian standard-making bodies have to cover to create acceptable, implementable, evidence-based, standards.

Including a gender lens in the process of standards is undoubtedly desirable. Including such commitments in a key chapter like TBT is invitation to trouble. These TBT-gender provisions could provide an effective tool to either stymie imports or stymie Indian industry to enhance exports. The Digital Trade chapter includes articles to address barriers faced by women to participate in digital trade.

Why does India require UK's cooperation to identify and address barriers faced by women in accessing digital trade? Why an FTA commitment to this effect? What if India is unable, by UK's ideas, to address certain barriers? Lack of regulatory capacity ODI, a well-known British think tank, already advocates the gender chapter opening up possibilities and opportunities for all genders in India, given that India recognises three genders.

'If interpreted and implemented correctly, this inclusive language holds the potential to help individuals, irrespective of their gender identity, access formal jobs and run successful businesses that trade with the UK'. UK on the other hand legally recognises only two genders  -  male and female. While these are absolutely valid aspirations, taking commitments in FTAs with little domestic regulatory and implementing capacity is nothing short of a recipe for disaster.

It must be remembered that the single most important motive behind any FTA is improving market access. An FTA, while signed by governments, is implemented on the ground only be private sector businesses. Setting them up for standards and regulation, they are hardly capable or willing to use, can only reverse whatever gains they may make out of preferential market access they obtain.
