Category: Editorial
Title: Physics Nobel Prize Quantum computing is the Part Two

Physics Nobel Prize 2025: Quantum computing is the future

The quantum behavior in superconducting circuits has led to the creation of superconducting qubits, the building blocks of quantum computers and can perform intricate calculations far beyond the reach of a classical computer, marking the dawn of a new computational era. Google Sycamore processor, co-developed by martinis has already demonstrated quantum supremacy by solving problems faster than any existing supercomputer. The implications extend far beyond computing.

In cybersecurity, quantum technology challenges current encryption models, driving innovation in post-quantum cryptography to safeguard credentials, financial data, and national digital infrastructures. If appropriate innovations are not done, our personal data, bank accounts etc. can be hacked using quantum computers.

Quantum key distribution (QKD) further enhances data privacy, allowing secure communications based on unbreakable principles of Quantum Physics. In industrial applications, quantum enhanced sensors can detect minute changes in temperature, magnetic fields or vibrations, revolutionising areas like predictive maintenance, manufacturing quality control and energy management. These sensors could form the backbone of quantum secure industrial networks, protecting critical systems from cyber threats while improving performance and efficiency.

We are aware that information is stored in any normal computer as bits, which are either 0 or 1. Quantum computer uses qubits that can be understood to be behaving like a spinning coin in air with 0 and 1 at the same time. Group of qubits can become linked indicating that when we learn about the one we get to know something about the other too.

The two traits are utilised in a quantum machine and bring out several possibilities in parallel. Google's quantum AI team has recenly reported that its 'Willow Superconducting chip' has run a new test and obtained 13,000 times faster result as compared to the result from top supercomputer. This test is called Quantum Echoes and can be repeated and checked using other quantum machines.

Google calls it as 'verifiable quantum advantage'. Earlier quantum advantage demos produced one off random results and thus, were not verifiable. Quantum Echoes, however, measure the number called 'out of time order correlator' (OTOC), which would again emerge when another quantum computer follows the same step.

Thus the number is specific irrespective of the quantum computer used. The similar output can be obtained after redoing/ rechecking and hence it is 'verifiable'. We encounter chaos in natural processes, which is generally characterized by the high sensitivity of a system towards small perturbations. The notable examples being weather patterns, wherein a small change in initial conditions leads to different outcomes over time and population dynamics where a small shift in local population can affect the entire ecosystem.

Chaos is also found in quantum systems, like dynamics of magnetisation in atomic nuclei subjected under magnetic field varying with time and flow of electrons on high temperature superconductors. Quantum computers are ideal for simulating such chaotic systems. A quantum computer simulating OTOC signals from a physical system in nature such as molecules, whose system parameters are not fully known can be compared with OTOC signals against the real world data about the physical system and observe when they best agree.

A more precise estimation of system parameter can be made as compared to any other technique. The echo number thus, can track any small disturbance spreading through the material and has tremendous scope in guiding the design of alloys, cleaner catalysts and zero-in on a chemical battery that can last longer. The physics of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance is being extensively used in Medical Science especially in MRI.
