Category: Editorial
Title: Physics Nobel Prize Quantum computing is the Part One

Physics Nobel Prize 2025: Quantum computing is the future

Century-old quantum mechanics can explain how a single sub-atomic particle cross the energy barrier through tunnelling, be located at multiple places simultaneously, occupies discrete energy levels and emits energy in quanta as it moves from higher energy level to lower energy level. Three US Physics Professors; namely John Clarke, University of California Berkeley, Michel H Devoret Yale University, New Haven CT and University of California, Santa Barbara and John M Martinis University of California, Santa Barabara, were awarded this year's Physics Nobel Prize. Quantum mechanics has advanced from single particle to macroscopic level, and during 1984 and 1985 these Professors have conducted experiments wherein quantum behavior has been observed at the macroscopic level, where billions and trillions of Cooper particles (two-electron closed system) are involved.

The Professors had discovered macroscopic mechanical tunneling and quantized energy level in a system large enough to be kept in hand. When they made this discovery in 1984 and 1985, Martinis was a PhD candidate, Devoret was a postdoctoral fellow, and Clarke was their professor and supervisor. Two of the three Laureates have links with Google.

Besides his professorship Devoret, is Chief Scientist of Google Quantum AI, while Martinis headed Google's Quantum AI lab till 2020. How Quantum Mechanics is different from Classical Mechanics? We have seen in our day today life that when a ball is thrown against a wall, it rebounds on the same side and never crosses to the other side of the wall.

In sharp contrast to this, atomic particles under quantum mechanical principles cross the barrier through tunneling, located at multiple positions simultaneously and can occupy discrete energy levels. In 1973 Physics Nobel Prize was won by Brian Josephson for discovering the flow of electric current between two superconductors separated by an insulator. This has been a very useful finding and superconductor-insulator-superconductor junction has been used in various experiments like measurement of fundamental physical constants and magnetic field etc.

and is commonly called as Josephson junction. This set-up was utilized by Nobel Laureates in the series of experiments they conducted in 1984 and 1985 meticulously isolated the set-up from its environment and ensured that the quantum effects are not destroyed by interference. They were successful in demonstrating the flow of electron through the set-up and also found the electrons exhibiting quantum mechanical behavior.

The superconducting chip separating another superconductor by an insulator had electric current flowing without any resistance. The electrons coordinate and move together in a single wave. The voltmeter reading showing zero initially starts showing value corresponding to a discrete energy level confirming that the particle has crossed the wall (the insulator) through tunneling.

Though the scientists have not been able to conclude the maximum size of the system exhibiting the quantum behavior, but the experiments conducted in 1984 and 1985 by the Nobel Laureates have confirmed that the system as large as the set-up chosen by them did show quantum behavior. The discovery led to the building of quantum-bits (qubits)  -  unit of information in quantum computers. The discovery has been extensively used in mobiles, cameras, transistors in computer microchips and optic cables etc.

that are part of our lives these days. The next generation quantum technology such as quantum cryptography, quantum computers and quantum sensors are the way forward from these inventions. These discoveries have far reaching consequences and have been providing breakthroughs in many fields of medicine, chemistry and environment etc.
