Category: Editorial
Title: Questions arising in the BoBNMC case Part Two

Questions arising in the BoB-NMC case

In its annual report for FY26, it says, "The Bank denies all allegations made against it (in the NMC case) and has filed a robust defence (on facts and law) in both proceedings. The Bank is represented by eminent barristers and law firms from India and the United Kingdom in the proceedings. The Bank maintains its view that claims cannot be crystallized at this stage given the Bank's robust defence in facts and law." RBI's response There has been no statement from the RBI so far regarding the settlement deal entered by Bank of Baroda.

RBI's core principles of banking supervision states, "Banking supervisors must practice global consolidated supervision over their internationally active banks, adequately monitoring and applying appropriate prudential norms to all aspects of the business conducted by these banking organisations worldwide, primarily at their foreign branches, joint ventures and subsidiaries." While the central bank may have been awaiting the judgment from ADGM court, the settlement without admitting any guilt leaves the episode in a grey area, since it does not absolve the bank from the allegations. The settlement raises concerns about possibility of governance lapse in the UAE branches of Bank of Baroda. The fraud has been perpetrated over several years from 2012 and 2020 and the administrators claim that Bank of Baroda had played a role in defrauding the investors and other creditors.

Also, the settlement sum is large enough to wipe out more than a quarter of its net profit for FY26; its capital would have been affected to that extent. With the stock price of BoB declining over 7 per cent since the news broke out, investors are clearly worried. In the judgment given by justice Sir Andrew Smith in November 2023 in ADGM Court of First Instance, it stated that, "The case against the Bank of Baroda also includes claims under Indian law alleging breach of banking standards." The RBI, as one of the regulators of BoB's overseas branches, can carry out an investigation of the case to assess if there has been any governance lapse in the operations, and bring the perpetrators to book.

Letting dust to settle on this case leaves room for such instances to crop up in other overseas branches in the future. If the central bank investigation finds no evidence of any wrongdoing by employees at the branch, it will help restore investor confidence in the governance of the public sector bank. That said, there have been several instances of employees or founders of Indian banks giving credit against fake invoices or collaterals for personal gains.

In the ₹14,000 crore scam involving Punjab National Bank and the diamond merchant Nirav Modi, the bank staff had issued fake letters of undertakings without collateral which were used to raise credit from overseas branches of Indian banks. In Yes Bank's case, the co-founder, Rana Kapoor, is alleged to have facilitated high-risk loans not backed by collateral to DHFL. But an investigation by the RBI and bringing perpetrators to book had helped in restoring public confidence in the bank and the banking system in these instances.

By Lokeshwarri SK
