Category: Editorial
Title: Questions arising in the BoBNMC case Part One

Questions arising in the BoB-NMC case

BoB-NMC case The settlement without admission of any wrongdoing or liability raises concerns about possible transgressions which may need to be addressed Last week Bank of Baroda made everyone sit up when it paid an inordinately large sum of $600 million, amounting to ₹5,700 crore, in an out-of-court settlement to close the litigation involving the NMC Health group and its joint administrators. This settlement brings an end to the litigations which began several years ago and was being carried out across two continents  -  in Abu Dhabi Global Market (ADGM) Court of First Instance and in the High Court of Justice, England and Wales. All charges in these courts against Bank of Baroda will now be dropped, though the bank does not admit any liability or wrongdoing.

The exchange announcement further states that the terms of the settlement agreement shall remain confidential. While the litigations against the bank may have been dropped, several questions arise here. Was the Abu Dhabi branch of Bank of Baroda in breach of Indian banking regulations? Did a few officials of the bank collude with the NMC group's management to lend against insufficient or fictitious collateral?

If yes, then shouldn't those officials be brought to book by RBI? Did the bank's officials help NMC group to defraud other banks and creditors in Abu Dhabi? Should there be an investigation into this case by the RBI to find answer to these questions? How it unravelled The BR Shetty-owned NMC Group was the biggest provider of health services in UAE with over 200 hospitals and other healthcare services.

These companies were owned by NMC Healthcare (NMCH), which is under the regulation of the Abu Dhabi Global Market. NMCH is in turn owned by NMC plc, which was incorporated in England. Trouble started when Muddy Waters, a US based short-seller, released a report on the group in December 2019. The report alleged that there were serious doubts about the "company's financial statements, including its asset values, cash balance, reported profits, and reported debt levels.

At the worst of times, the company has invested in large assets at costs that we find too high to be plausible  -  including from parties we believe are de facto under common control. This behaviour gives rise to concerns about fraudulent asset values and theft of company assets." The forensic audit which followed these allegations revealed that the NMC group had inflated its assets through fake invoices. It had taken large debt based on these inflated assets, which were not disclosed in the financial statements.

In April 2020, insolvency proceedings began against NMC PLC in England. In September 2020, the 36 companies incorporated in the UAE were also put under administration. The administrators then began legal proceedings against the founder of the NMC group, Dr BR Shetty, the CEO, Prashant Manghat and Bank of Baroda in the Abu Dhabi Global Market Court of First Instance and England & Wales High Court.

Allegations against the bank According to the ADGM Court of First Instance, the claims against Shetty, Manghat and Bank of Baroda included defrauding the NMC group leading to its insolvency, gross negligence and acting as an accessory in perpetrating the fraud. Though Bank of Baroda primarily acted as a lender to the group, the joint administrators' claim suggests that it had been an accessory in committing the fraud. The bank has been denying the allegations against it so far and had held that it had watertight argument to protect itself.
