Category: Editorial
Title: Raising the bar for a rate hike Part Two

Raising the bar for a rate hike

The RBI took three measures for development and regulatory policy. It has initiated a review of the loan pricing practices by banks. Pricing of bank loans has a long history of evolution keeping in mind transparency and monetary policy transmission imperatives. Until 2010, banks used the prime lending rate, followed by the base rate.

After 2016, the banks have migrated to the marginal cost of funds-based lending rate. To further increase the transmission, the RBI permitted the external benchmark lending rate (EBLR) in 2019. Currently, 67.6% of bank loans are under the EBLR regime. The twin regimes need some standardisation to ensure uniformity and enhance transparency in loan pricing across entities.

The rise of a blended economy across rural and semi-urban pockets necessitates revisiting the co-operative framework (India has 1,457 urban cooperative banks or UCBs, 34 state co-operative banks, 351 district central co-operative banks, and one industrial co-operative bank of Tamil Nadu). Given the importance of UCBs in extending last-mile credit and supporting localised financial intermediation, the RBI has now introduced on-tap licensing to UCBs. This step not only harmonises the bank licensing policy but also opens ways to introduce fresh capital and innovation in this sector.

Further, given the narrow business base on the lending side, rural cooperatives continue to face the challenges of lending portfolio concentration (sector and geographic) compared to UCBs. The current measure addresses this aspect. An interesting point in the policy statement is on exchange rates. The RBI has clearly emphasised that it will ensure no self-fulfilling prophecy is built into the foreign exchange market.

The $36.7-billion FCNR(B) inflows till July 31 have enabled foreign exchange recoup of ~$20.0 billion and vacating of outstanding forward position by $13 billion in the short end (up to three months) till June-end. Summing up, the trifecta of resilient domestic activities, exogenous shocks (mainly from West Asia), and weather-related disruptions (El Niño) should dictate the terms of reference for Mint Street even as it proactively and prudently engages in market-making activities and regulations that bode well for the system. That incidentally reminds us that its action and intent should be read like an osmosis, a diffusion that balances competing forces and resources optimally.

Thus, the pause can be longer in future lest short-termism triumphs over sustainable measures. Written by Soumya Kanti Ghosh Views are personal.
