Category: Editorial
Title: Ray of hope On courts and reflexive arrests

Ray of hope: On courts and reflexive arrests

Courts are coming down on reflexive arrests of activists The district administration in Noida, Uttar Pradesh, went to great lengths to detain 25-year-old Delhi University law student and activist Akriti Chaudhary on April 11, 2026, in connection with protests by workers in the city. But on September 2, the Allahabad High Court quashed her National Security Act (NSA) detention, terming it an "abuse of the draconian preventive detention law" and came down heavily on the administration. The High Court's intervention is a silver lining in the dark cloud of extreme executive arbitrariness that is smothering the democratic soul of India.

It termed the Noida administration's conduct "despotic", its allegations against the activist a "concocted story", and noted that the District Magistrate had passed the NSA detention order "without application of mind". Without mincing words, the High Court warned that an unhinged bureaucracy could reduce the State of Uttar Pradesh to an "Orwellian dystopia". The Division Bench of Justices Atul Sreedharan and Achal Sachdev ordered compensation of ₹5 lakh for Ms.

Chaudhary, which is to be deducted from the salaries of the officers concerned. The facts of the case were brazenly in contradiction with the claims of the police and the district administration, but it also took a rigorous and conscientious Bench to provide this relief. It noted in its order that Ms.

Chaudhary was already in the custody of the police when the violence that she is accused of took place. The relief from the High Court has not set the activist free, as she is named by the U.P. Police in 11 other cases. It will be a long journey of legal battles to get her the freedom that every citizen in a democratic country deserves.

That the police would go to such an extent to make life difficult for someone who stood up for the underprivileged must shock the conscience of the nation. Between April 10 and 18, 2026, industrial and contractual workers in Noida had staged protests demanding a wage hike and wage parity with neighbouring Haryana. On April 13, the protests allegedly turned violent.

The Noida Police claimed to have "strong electronic and videographic evidence" of incitement against Ms. Chaudhary, and it turned out to be merely that, a claim which could not be established. Ms. Chaudhary could receive legal support and media attention that hundreds of others in comparable situations cannot easily access, while the workers remain trapped in miserable conditions because of oppressive business models and state policies that favour capital owners, with the promises made to them still unfulfilled.

Yet, the Allahabad High Court's intervention in Ms. Chaudhary's case is a ray of hope that democratic protests will be heeded rather than suppressed by the strong-arm tactics of the executive.
