Category: Editorial
Title: RBI gives Urban Cooperative Banks new lease Part One

RBI gives Urban Cooperative Banks new lease of life | Explained

Banks new lease of life Reigniting the cooperative banking sector, which went through a painful course correction, is a logical step to deepen financial inclusion as MSMEs continue to face credit gaps despite digital lenders' growth When urban cooperative banks (UCBs)  -  built on community trust  -  enter the public discourse, unfortunately, the first image to surface is that of Madhavpura Mercantile Cooperative Bank (MMCB) and Punjab and Maharashtra Cooperative (PMC) Bank. Poor governance, political interference, dual regulation, concentrated lending, weak capital structure and technology deficiency sum up for the failure of several UCBs, forcing the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to cancel licenses and also stop issuing fresh ones from 2004. Lessons learned from the past, together with its belief that expansion without sound governance could multiply risks, led the banking regulator to rethink UCBs, and the RBI recently decided to resume issuing licenses to them after more than two decades.

The RBI's renewed licensing policy gives a new lease of life to the UCBs, which were set up with the specific purpose of acting as a bridge between informal community finance and formal banking, with the guiding principle of localisation reducing information asymmetry. In the early 1990s, there were as many as 1,100 UCBs, growing with a cautious approach, but after economic liberalisation, the RBI adopted a more liberal approach following recommendations of the Marathe Committee. As of March 31, 2003, there were 2,104 UCBs of which 56 were scheduled banks.

About 79% of these are in five States  -  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu. After which, it shrank to around 1,500 due to cancellations, mergers, voluntary conversions or liquidations as governance foibles translated in to systemic risks for the failed entities . Birth of UCBs Conceived as entities of financial democracy, akin to Self Help Groups in modern parlance, UCBs were established on the cooperative principle of mutual assistance by mobilising savings from members and extending affordable credit to those overlooked by mainstream banks, a classic example of financial inclusion.

Owing its origins to the 1904 Cooperative Credit Societies Act, the UCBs played an important role in financing neighbourhood commerce, retail trade, housing, education and small businesses, especially after independence. Interestingly, the first urban cooperative credit society was registered in Kanjivaram in Madras province in October, 1904. Misgovernance As the cooperative banking ecosystem began to grow exponentially, making the hot seats mighty, the structural vulnerabilities began to emerge, but addressing them was difficult due to regulatory duality.

The RBI supervised banking functions, while the management and governance remained under the jurisdiction of State Registrars of Cooperative Societies. Governance failures became endemic as weak internal controls, connected lending, inadequate risk management and politicised board elections led to institutional breakdown, finally making many fall apart due to the weight of crony capitalism. The UCBs experienced a severe capital crunch as the cooperative board structure "one member, one vote", irrespective of shareholding, reduced incentives for capital infusion, denting public confidence and leaving depositors in lurch.
