Category: Editorial
Title: RBIs calibrated opening up of acquisition

RBI's calibrated opening up of acquisition loans is correct

Overpaying for targets is a key reason why acquisitions fail; skin in the game will reduce the acquirer's propensity to overpay After restricting acquisition financing by banks from the inception of the Banking Regulation Act 1949, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is now testing the waters on relaxing these curbs. In a recent draft regulation, it has proposed to allow banks to extend loans for acquisitions, with several guardrails. Both banks and India Inc seem unhappy with this and are clamouring for more.

However, given the chequered history of corporate acquisitions globally, RBI's cautious approach is justified. The draft regulation specifies that banks extend these loans only to listed companies. The acquiring company must have a three-year track record of profitability and positive net worth. Deal advisors criticise these requirements on the grounds that India now has many well-run unlisted firms.

Quarterly financial disclosures by listed companies make it easy for banks to do due diligence Unlisted firms with their once-a-year disclosures don't offer this comfort. Two, the draft proposes that banks cap their aggregate exposure to acquisition financing at 10 per cent of their Tier 1 capital. Banks say that this is too restrictive.

They do have a point. Given domestic banks' cumulative Tier 1 capital of about ₹28 lakh crore, only about ₹2.8 lakh crore willl be available for acquisition financing. In contrast, India's mergers and acquisitions market witnesses annual deals worth ₹8- 9 lakh crore. However, given that this is only the start, RBI can evaluate the experience with the initial set of deals and look to increase these limits in a graded fashion if the experience is good.

Three, proposed rules insist that the acquirer and target not be related parties and get independent verification of deal valuations. This is much needed given corporate India's propensity to divert loan funds to related parties. Four, banks can finance only 70 per cent of the acquisition value with the remaining 30 per cent to be brought in as equity by the acquirer.

While this is seen as limiting, RBI is seeking to ensure that acquiring companies demonstrate skin in the game when seeking bank loans. Overpaying for targets is a key reason why acquisitions fail; skin in the game will reduce the acquirer's propensity to overpay. The debt cap is essential to rein in leveraged buyouts, which have caused many a debt blow-up in the Western world.

Overall, acquisition financing would not require this many checks and balances, if corporate buyouts had a high success rate. But in truth, most corporate acquisitions fail to deliver on the promised synergies, growth and cost savings. In November 2024, professors Baruch and Feng published a seminal book which studied over 40,000 corporate acquisitions over 40 years.

They concluded that the failure rate for corporate acquisitions is as high as 70-75 per cent. India Inc too had its share of failed overseas mega-acquisitions in 2007-2010. It is wise of RBI to not risk banking system stability with such a poor record.
