Category: Editorial
Title: Rebuilding ties On India engaging with

Rebuilding ties: On India engaging with Turkiye and Azerbaijan

India must approach foreign relations with more pragmatism, less emotion New Delhi's recent moves to re-engage diplomatically and hold Foreign Office Consultations with diplomats in Turkiye and Azerbaijan is a considerable shift in the government's policy, especially over the past year. Since the India-Pakistan conflict and Operation Sindoor in May 2025, the government had expressed its anger not just at Pakistan, but at countries that were seen as supportive of Pakistan, diplomatically or militarily during the conflict. In particular, the Ministry of External Affairs had expressed its disappointment with statements made by Turkiye, Azerbaijan and Malaysia, that questioned the government's decision to launch strikes on terror sites in Pakistan after the Pahalgam terror attacks.

During briefings about Operation Sindoor, as the 96- hour military conflict from May 7-10 was named, the government left out envoys from countries that it felt had not expressed solidarity with India. In a military briefing in July, the deputy chief of army staff said India had had to contend with at least three adversaries on its border with Pakistan, including Türkiye. Azerbaijan too was believed to have helped Pakistan with technological support.

Trade and tourism to Turkiye and Azerbaijan dropped significantly for several months, as calls to boycott them went out from influential accounts. During its evacuation of Indians from Iran after US-Israel airstrikes on nuclear installations in June 2025, the MEA pointedly told those heading out by land routes to use Armenia and Turkmenistan, not either Turkiye or Azerbaijan. In addition, foreign policy commentary suggested that India was building an alliance of India, Armenia, Greece as a counter to their age-old rivals Pakistan, Azerbaijan and Turkiye, who had already formed a strong trilateral grouping.

Given the heated rhetoric, and the freeze in diplomatic ties, the decision to send Secretary West in the MEA, Sibi George, to Baku to revive Foreign office consultations with Azerbaijani counterparts last week, and to invite the Turkish Deputy Foreign Minister to Delhi this week, are significant diplomatic moves that indicate that the governments in Baku and Ankara too feel that better bilateral relations are in their interests. In a world more fraught with conflicts that fast spiral out of control, it is necessary for New Delhi to pick its diplomatic battles more carefully. The quick escalation from government demarches to online outrage and calls for boycotts, have in the past few years had a detrimental impact on bilateral ties with close friends and neighbours as well.

With countries that are adversaries, as both Turkiye and Azerbaijan have been, given their closeness to Pakistan, and positions on the Kashmir dispute, New Delhi must consider its options with less emotion and more pragmatism. India has traditionally managed relations between sparring rivals without allowing itself to be hyphenated with Pakistan, or by falling into multilateral "camps".
