Category: Editorial
Title: Recent FTAs could erode our policy space Part Two

Recent FTAs could erode our policy space

This has significant implications for our generic drug producers, as they primarily rely on "working disclosure" as an important source of market information and intelligence. This can delay the entry of generic drugs into the market, thereby severely limiting access and availability of low-cost medicines for millions of people. EU agreement Third, a significant concern for India in its trade agreement with the EU is the chapter on trade and sustainable development, as it integrates non-trade issues (labour and environment) in India's FTA template.

Provisions related to labour and the environment can easily be instruments of disguised protectionism. It is a different matter that the legal text clearly states that these disciplines should not be used for "protectionist trade purposes", and that the "violation of fundamental principles and rights" at work cannot be invoked. This provision is open to different interpretations.

It provides significant leeway to EU policymakers to challenge Indian exports produced in sectors where labour practices and wage structures differ from EU norms, creating space for them to invoke disguised barriers to trade. In this context, the EU's green trade measures such as deforestation regulations, CSDDD, and CBAM, will certainly impose strict scrutiny on India's labour and environmental practices. These green trade measures may offset the potential market access benefits of India's labour-intensive exports.

Fourth, provisions on digital trade in trade agreements with the UAE, the UK, and the EU are in 'best endeavour' language; however, the real challenge is likely to arise when India negotiates digital trade disciplines in ongoing FTA talks with the US and South Korea. Interestingly, the digital trade chapter of the India EU FTA prevents India from demanding access to source code of EU firms' software and AI systems thereby significantly constraining power of Indian regulators to understand and regulate AI system. Further, it also places restrict on Indian authorities to audit algorithms even during investigations.

There is a high possibility that the US trade negotiators will put tremendous pressure on Indian trade negotiators to convert these 'best endeavour' languages into slightly stronger language, possibly hard commitments in a few areas. Digital trade commitments through trade agreements could subsume significant policy space to frame domestic digital policies. Indian policymakers should be cautious and pragmatic while negotiating trade agreements, ensuring that the quest for market access, export diversification, and GVC integration does not come at the cost of policy sovereignty, regulatory constraints, and, most importantly, development imperatives.

By Surendar Singh The writer is an Associate Professor, Jindal School of Liberal Arts and Humanities, O.P. Jindal Global University, Sonipat. Views expressed are personal
