Category: Editorial
Title: Reinforcing the case for a One Health Part One

Reinforcing the case for a One Health approach

Global health risks demand a One Health approach grounded in coordination and scientific collaboration to strengthen pandemic preparedness and response When the 1995 film Outbreak, starring the inimitable Dustin Hoffman, was released to audiences worldwide, it seemed like surreal science fiction, pitched at the very edge of the realm of possibility. The pacy film profiled the desperate race to contain an imaginary zoonotic virus, Motaba, that jumped to humans as a result of anthropogenic activity - deforestation and trade in wild animals - spreading across nations like a forest fire. The movie, though dramatic, served as a prescient illustration of a crisis that was to visit the world, nearly a quarter of a century later: the COVID-19 pandemic.

Interestingly, the film also stood out for its early portrayal of the core principles of One Health  -  long before the term was even coined. Since then, though, One Health, which draws on the interconnectedness between humans, animals and the environment, has emerged as a key concept gaining traction among nations, though practical implementation has progressed at a nearly glacial pace. From fiction to reality This year's World Health Day message  -  "Together for health.

Stand with science"  -  underlines the essentiality of adopting a One Health approach to protect animals, the environment, and humans. It also highlights the critical role of scientific collaboration and the use of evidence in crafting policy. As Outbreak outlines cinematically, there is a permanent state of conflict between different departments, arms of the government, and even nations, that come in the way of working synchronously to better tackle health crises.

As John S. Mackenzie and Martyn Jeggo indicated in their 2019 editorial in Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, the term 'One Health' was first officially used in 2003-2004, associated with the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome. With the spread of avian influenza H5N1, it gained ground.

A significant contributor was the 'Manhattan Principles,' derived at a 2004 Wildlife Conservation Society meeting, which recognised the link between human and animal health and the threats diseases pose to food supplies and economies. The authors explained: "It has become increasingly clear over the past three decades that the majority of novel, emergent zoonotic infectious diseases originate in animals and that the principal drivers of their emergence are associated with human activities, including changes in ecosystems and land use, intensification of agriculture, urbanisation, and international travel and trade." Today, international wisdom acknowledges that a pathogen unknown to mankind can suddenly emerge, wreak havoc on populations, and threaten the stability of the world faster than one can say 'One Health'. According to the One Health Commission: "One Health is an integrated, unifying approach that aims to sustainably balance and optimise the health of people, animals and ecosystems." The approach it advocates involves mobilising multiple sectors, disciplines and communities to foster well-being and tackle threats to health and ecosystems.

The COVID-19 pandemic, in some senses, was the fulcrum that convinced even reluctant nations of the world to invest in One Health, demonstrating visibly what the lack of coordination; and on the other hand, seamless coordination can do. It was the collective sharing of SARS-CoV-2 genetic data and the study of human genetic factors in COVID-19 susceptibility that drove the international vaccine development effort. The WHO Pandemic Agreement, adopted on May 20, 2025, is a legally binding international treaty aimed at enhancing global prevention, preparedness, and response to future pandemics.
