Category: Editorial
Title: Reinforcing the case for a One Health Part Two

Reinforcing the case for a One Health approach

It focuses on equity, establishing a Pathogen Access and Benefit-Sharing system to ensure rapid pathogen data sharing and equitable access to vaccines and treatments. Internationally, One Health is led by the Quadripartite collaboration  - including WHO, FAO, the United Nations Environment Programme, and the World Organisation for Animal Health. In October 2022, they launched the One Health Joint Plan of Action.

Post-COVID, the Indian government fast-tracked collaborative positions to address future crises. It mobilised the National One Health Mission as a collaborative initiative designed to integrate human, animal, and environmental health sectors. It avowedly aims to enhance pandemic preparedness, disease surveillance, and zoonotic disease control.

With increasing evidence emerging of stressors from climate change and how these affect the natural ways of the world, it has become clear that addressing the effects of extreme climate events is essential. While several national initiatives exist to drive India ahead on this path, continuous monitoring, evaluation, and interim mitigation programmes are urgently needed. In this context, some State-led initiatives present inspired examples for replication.

These include Odisha's pioneering Climate Budget to track climate-resilient development expenditures, Kerala's participatory carbon-neutral plan in Meenangadi, and Tamil Nadu's Green Climate Company and Cool Roof Project in Chennai. Coordinated solutions The One Health Summit in Lyon, France, currently under way, in time for World Health Day, will focus on the main factors contributing to infectious and non-communicable diseases, such as zoonotic reservoirs, vectors, antimicrobial resistance (AMR), sustainable food systems, and exposure to pollution. It hopes to foster international and interdisciplinary dialogues about global challenges, particularly with reference to co-operation, propose solutions to strengthen health systems, and rethink global institutional frameworks that will align with One Health goals.

Welcoming increasing political consensus on One Health, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said in 2023: "A One Health approach makes public health sense, economic sense and common sense." Indeed, the only thing that makes sense in an increasingly interconnected world is an approach that recognises and acts on these connections. By Ramya Kannan
