Category: Editorial
Title: Reserve Bank likely to start a shallow rate

Reserve Bank likely to start a shallow rate hike cycle

Even with large FCNR inflows, the rupee continues to weaken; a rate hike may help contain the pressure The RBI Governor's tone in the last MPC meeting was relatively dovish, and the central bank indicated that they would look at a rate hike only if the inflationary pressure gets broad-based. Since the last policy, there have been some key developments that will impact the RBI's policy decision in the upcoming meeting. One, global crude oil prices have shot up sharply in the last fortnight, intermittently breaching $100/bbl level.

The US Federal Reserve has started the rate-hike cycle, while the BoJ and ECB continue with the hikes. There continues to be weakening pressure on rupee even with large FCNR flows. Moreover, the FCNR flows have resulted in large surplus liquidity in the system. The critical question is in this backdrop is: how do we view the RBI's policy decision?

More rate hikes We expect the RBI to hike policy rate by 25 bps in the October policy meeting, followed by another 25 bps rate hike in December. We expect the policy rate hike cycle to be shallow with total of 50-75 bps rate hikes. Inflationary concerns have aggravated with the latest spike in global crude oil prices.

Average Brent crude oil prices jumped to $101/bbl in September from an average of $85/ bbl in the previous three months. This has led to increased inflationary concerns in the economy. Poor monsoon has also led to concerns around rise in food inflation. CPI inflation rose to 4.8 per cent in August from an average of 3.9 per cent in the April-June quarter.

We expect CPI inflation to rise to 6 per cent by Q3 FY27, mainly led by food inflation. Food inflation has already touched a high of 5.7 per cent in August, and we expect it to further breach 7 per cent in Q3 FY27. WPI inflation has risen to an average of around 10 per cent in the last three months. So far, threat to inflation was mainly due to supply-side bottlenecks, but we are seeing signs of CPI inflation getting broad-based.

In August, around 19 per cent of the 358 items in the CPI basket recorded inflation above 6 per cent, up from 13 per cent in March. The CPI diffusion index, which measures the breadth of price increases across categories, rose to 72 from 44 over the same period. A reading above 50 indicates that more components are recording rising inflation than a fall.

Growth resilient While inflationary concerns have risen, the economy has been recording good growth. GDP growth in Q1 FY27 turned out better than market expectations at 7.8 per cent. The strong growth was supported by all pillars of the economy, with investment, consumption and exports recording healthy growth.

Even though there are threats from high global crude oil prices and US tariff-related hurdles, the economy has been showing strong resilience. While we anticipate GDP growth to moderate in the next few quarters, we still expect healthy growth at a little above 7 per cent in FY27. Globally, inflationary concerns have escalated due to supply-side constraints.

With rising US yields, the two-year India-US yield differential has fallen to 172 bps in September 2026, from 222 bps a year ago, and around 300 bps two years ago. This has been putting weakening pressure on the rupee. Even with the large inflows through FCNR deposits, the weakening pressure on the currency continues.

A rate hike by the RBI may help contain the pressure on the currency. FCNR deposits have resulted in a surge in liquidity in the banking system. It will be important for the central bank to ensure that the excess liquidity from the system is absorbed for any policy rate to be effective. We expect the continuation of OMOs and VRRR auctions that the RBI has been conducting to absorb excess liquidity from the system.

The market would look for further guidance on additional measures, particularly CRR or I-CRR hikes, given the significant liquidity glut. Thus, apart from rate decisions, liquidity management would be a key highlight of the policy. By Rajani Sinha The writer is Chief Economist, CareEdge Ratings. Views are personal
