Category: Editorial
Title: Restoring trust in Indias examination system Part Two

Restoring trust in India's examination system

Unfortunately, it has not been the case in the past, the guilty are not behind bars. As if the two exam fiascos referred to above were not enough to give a wake-up call to all concerned, the Lucknow coaching center fire that snatched away fifteen young lives comes as a thundering wake-up call. The Uttar Pradesh Government has responded swiftly, 18 engineers booked, four more arrested.

Coaching Centers are being inspected throughout the state! It is well established that every fire tragedy is invariably a consequence of total neglect of fire safety norms, classes conducted in structures that brutally ignore the structural building norms. One wonders why these basic essentials are not checked at regular intervals.

Extraordinary arrangements were made to ensure the proper conduct of the NEET re-examination on June 21. There were no reports of impersonators or solvers even making an attempt to trespass. The planning worked, and the successful conduct brought a sigh of relief. One fervently hopes that the systems will gear themselves afresh, and in the coming years, no young individual shall encounter situations that could plunge him/her in continuous anxiety, uncertainty, a sense of fear, and underperformance.

Every human being is touched to the core when the reports of the suicide note of a teenager: 'I just can't bear the tension already undergone once again'. One's heart goes out to the bereaved families; every sensitive soul mourns with them. This probably does not include the mafia, and also the parents who encourage the purchase of 'leaked papers', spend vulgar amounts, and commit the sin of throwing away millions of other young people and their families in immeasurable agony and pain.

When even a single suicide takes place consequent upon anti-social and immoral machinations of rogue elements, the entire nation must stand up to ensure that it's not repeated again. In a humane world, everyone who believes in "Sarve Bhavantu Sukhinah" has a role to perform. The social system must take a serious note, expose them as the culprits who damage lives, kill young aspirations, and commit heinous social sacrilege.

Apart from putting all our expectations of strict action against the mafia solely on government action, which have been mostly inadequate, lethargic and inefficient, time has come when institutions, teachers and academics, and non-political social activists also accept their role in bringing back the moral order in the world of education. It is common knowledge that when it comes to the preparation of a child in the family for examinations like CBSE, NEET, JEE and others, it is the entire family that gears up to assist and inspire. No disturbance or distractions could be permitted.

Think of the anxiety and hope of the parents of a brilliant child, educated in a government school, from a family with scant earnings, how life-transforming could be the success in such examinations. The challenge before the nation is to restore the reputation of its schools and higher education organisations in their competence and capability to maintain the purity of the system of examinations and assessment at each stage. The uncertainty, anxiety and the tension must not be permitted to retard the enthusiasm and self-confidence of even a single child getting ready to compete.
