Category: Editorial
Title: retail lessons from the father of Japans Part Three

retail lessons from the father of Japan's convenience store industry (Finshots) 3 EC has a lot to answer but SC gives it a free pass  -  and more

But Suzuki wasn't always a fan of this approach. He believed that too much consensus could slow down decisions that were good for the business. And he proved it when 7-Eleven Japan took control of Southland. He decided to shut around 1,200 underperforming stores and replaced its old distribution network, improved product selection, rationalised pricing, and most importantly, rolled out an integrated information system inspired by Japan's model.

As you can imagine, not everyone liked it. Many franchise owners pushed back because they were losing the freedom to choose their own manufacturers, products, and distributors. But Suzuki pressed ahead anyway. And the results spoke for themselves. By 1994, the US business was profitable again. Now, just to be clear, this isn't an argument for arrogance or ignoring expertise.

Suzuki still listened. He just didn't believe that every good idea needed universal approval. Because sometimes, chasing consensus only gives you the average of existing opinions. And Suzuki understood that customers can't always tell you what they want if what you're building doesn't exist yet. They have to experience something new to like or hate it.

And that, folks, is how 7-Eleven Japan became so different from the many other 7-Elevens around the world  -  turning into a place where busy people don't just grab sandwiches, chips, and drinks, but also pay bills, withdraw cash, photocopy documents, book tickets, and more. EC has a lot to answer but SC gives it a free pass -  and more Most disturbingly, even on the citizenship issue, the Court, in effect, gives the EC free play, without any guardrails The Supreme Court ruling on petitions challenging the Special Intensive Revision of electoral rolls spends far too many words in underlining that which is uncontestable  -  the Election Commission has a constitutional mandate to ensure free and fair polls. And that which is unexceptionable  -  the electoral rolls on which the polls rest must be accurate and reliable.

No one, no political party, has questioned either of the above principles or pieties. There is no doubt that the EC plays a leading role in the India story, and its monitoring of the sprawling electoral exercise in a country of diversities burnishes that story immeasurably. Undoubtedly, too, the periodic clean-up of electoral rolls is necessary, in light of large-scale migration, rapid urbanisation, illegal cross-border movement, non-reporting of deaths, duplication of entries.

Having said that, however, the problem begins. The EC's conduct of the SIR in Bihar, and then the manner of its roll-out in West Bengal especially, have raised important questions about the delicate balance between the need for electoral integrity and the imperative of voter inclusion. There are widespread concerns that the EC's actions have tilted the balance against the citizen  -  by shifting the burden of proof onto vulnerable voters; by laying down an onerous documentation regime; by setting compressed timelines for the voter and none for the appellate process.

This is what led to nearly 27 lakh being disenfranchised in the West Bengal election. Now, the Court does not just exonerate the EC, it hands it a free pass by giving it the benefit of the doubt on every count and unfettered procedural latitude. Most disturbingly, even on the citizenship issue, the Court, in effect, gives the EC free play, without any guardrails.
