Category: Editorial
Title: retail lessons from the father of Japans Part Two

retail lessons from the father of Japan's convenience store industry (Finshots) 3 EC has a lot to answer but SC gives it a free pass  -  and more

This meant dead products started piling up on shelves. Suzuki called them "shelf warmers". And he realised that a computer tracking past sales could never solve this problem. So he built a system called tanpinkanri, where store staff didn't just restock shelves based on past data, but on what customers would want next.

They made predictions based on hypotheses: What will this specific customer, in this specific neighbourhood, want today? But how would they know that? Well, let's explain with a simple example. Let's say there's a local sports event tomorrow at a stadium three streets away. That would mean the store needs to stock energy drinks, glucose, quick bites, soft drinks, and maybe even pom poms for the audience to cheer.

That's how staff would decide what orders to place with suppliers today. Or take payday. Since Japanese workers are paid once a month, some stores would strategically lower the price of boxed lunches in the days before payday and raise them again afterwards. Another store may have noticed that a sunny morning during monsoon season often meant unprepared customers by afternoon.

So they stocked umbrellas. Basically, the local knowledge of store staff fed directly into what appeared on shelves. They worked more like analysts than simple store staff, observing and asking fresh questions every single day, staying true to tanpinkanri, which literally translates to "control of every single item"  -  tanpin meaning "every single thing" and kanri meaning "control".

Lesson #2: Killing a product is not a failure Tanpinkanri was not just a system for choosing what to stock but also for deciding what to stop stocking, and doing it quickly. Because in retail, the standard instinct is to keep a product on the shelves as long as it's moving. But Suzuki believed otherwise.

He felt that stores shouldn't just focus on adding what sells. They should also be unapologetic about ruthlessly removing what sells slowly to make room for what customers want right now. To make this work, store staff had access to a central system that helped them continuously examine, hypothesise, and re-examine product performance against demand patterns.

This helped them figure out exactly when a product's moment had passed. 7-Eleven was also able to create a system where a single truck could carry products from multiple suppliers. That meant stores could frequently order small quantities of a wide variety of items without driving up costs. It also reduced the chaos of having too many delivery trucks showing up every day.

The end result was that by 2003, this constant rotation meant 7-Eleven Japan was replacing nearly 70% of its products every year. And while most other retailers found that alarming, to Suzuki, that was exactly the point. He believed that one of retail's biggest problems was letting shelves go stale. Over time, these products which were merely "good enough" crowded out the things customers actually wanted and quietly signalled that the store wasn't really paying attention anymore.

Lesson #3: Consensus is not always your friend In Japanese corporate culture there's a long followed practice called nemawashi. Basically, before making a big decision, top executives meet different teams one-on-one, gather feedback, understand if there are any objections, refine ideas, and only then move forward with a formal proposal to introduce something new. The idea is to simply avoid conflict and build consensus before taking any action.
