Category: Editorial
Title: Rethinking social media for children Part One

Rethinking social media for children

Recently, three minor sisters ended their lives after jumping off the balcony of a ninth-floor flat in Ghaziabad, when their parents restricted their mobile phone usage. The preliminary police reports indicated that the tragic incident is linked to severe addiction to online gaming. While experts opined that it reflected 'a fatal outcome of a digital dependency'.

Recent data indicate that globally about 25.89 per cen of adolescents suffer from internet addiction, with 40 per cen experiencing addictive use of social media. A WHO 2022 study of 44 countries in Europe, central Asia and Canada, found that 11 per cen of adolescents, 13% of girls and 9% of boys, exhibit signs of problematic social media use, and that 12 per cen of adolescents are at the risk of troublesome gaming, with boys significantly more affected (16 per cen) than girls (7 per cen). While socio-psychologists maintain that a combination of factors, such as biological vulnerability, tailored platform designs with the ease of access and personalisation of algorithm-driven content, and a shifting social landscape drawing children more towards the world of social media.

A Pew Research Centre study in 2025 noted that 36 per cent of the US teens use one of five platforms, YouTube, TikTok, Instagram, Snapchat and Facebook, 'almost constantly', and around 64% of use AI chatbots, with 30% doing so daily. In its 2024 poll, it was revealed that many teenagers themselves have reported becoming more uneasy about the time they spend online, with girls in particular telling that apps were affecting their self-confidence, sleep patterns and overall mental health. While Jason Nagata, an associate professor of paediatrics, University of California, has alerted that the social media exposure has a detrimental impact on sleep, future depression and weight gain in adolescents.

One recent study also found that even low levels of social media use, about an hour per day in children under 13 was associated with poorer cognitive outcomes. As of 2021-25, globally,  approximately 1 in 7 (or nearly 15 per cent) 10 to 19-year-olds experience mental health disorders, accounting for 13-15% of the total global burden of disease in that age group, with anxiety and depression being the most common ( World Health Organisation (WHO) & UNICEF data). In India, nearly one in four adolescents reports symptoms consistent with anxiety or depression, while the NCRB has documented a steady rise in students' suicides over the past decade.

However, Tech companies claim to implement several layers of child safety measures, ranging from automated content filtering to advanced parental supervision and age verification tools. But, experts from Common Sense Media, a non-profit that evaluates entertainment and technology options for kids and families, and Stanford Medicine regarded the current safeguards as insufficient for minors. The European Commission recently found that TikTok's 'addictive design' features,  bypass the current safety efforts.

While many regulators and advocacy groups argued that the AI driven age-verification systems raise serious privacy and data security concerns for minors, as they are increasingly centred on 'Safety by Design'. Now, an ongoing 'bellwether' trial in a Los Angeles superior court  (K.G.M. v. Meta et al.), the first representative 'test case' against social media companies for their 'defective platform design products', in which the plaintiff,  a 20-year old Californian woman,  who started using YouTube since the age of 6 and Instagram from nine, and now suffers from anxiety, depression and body dysmorphia, makes them liable under product liability standards.
