Category: Editorial
Title: Rethinking social media for children Part Two

Rethinking social media for children

Platforms, earlier, got away from accountability under section 230 of the Communications Decency Act for users' content. Her lawyer compared the social media's product designs to dopamine-seeking 'slot machines'  and 'digital casinos'. Mark Zuckerberg, CEO, Meta, first time before the jury, defended Meta's safety efforts, and denied that Meta maximises user time through addictive features.

On the issue of user age, he underlined the need for better parental control at the device level. The case has drawn comparisons with the war against Big Tobacco companies in the 1980s, which had been accused of downplaying risks about cigarette smoking. While a Pew Research Centre survey of US parents in 2025, revealed that a majority of the parents felt that parenting today meant making tough choices about technology.

Eight-in-ten said the harms of social media outweigh the benefits. Two-thirds of parents (67%) said tech companies should do more to set rules around what kids can do or see online, and a 55% said that lawmakers should do more. The updated screen time guidelines issued by the American Academy of Pediatrics in 2016, impose an additional responsibility on parents and caregivers to establish rules that fit their lives and families.

Meanwhile, Australia, the world's first, has imposed a social media ban for children under 16, targeting major platforms with massive non-negotiable fines for non-compliance. Many countries like Denmark, France, and Greece, are set to follow suit. While the US federal Govt. is still at a crossroads to regulate the industry, and many state laws face First Amendment challenges.

In India, the Economic Survey of India (2025-26) has called for age-based limits for social media usage by children, and two states, Andhra Pradesh and Goa are mulling over such legislation. But, critics consider bans are technically difficult to implement, and mostly lead to a mass migration to Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), the unchecked web corners. In India, the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, has also come under criticism for  its 'consent gating' provisions which may result in either false declarations or exclusion.

As parents in today's world navigate a new frontier of raising children alongside technology, cyber parenting or digital parenting has become a reality. In 2019, WHO issued new guidelines, restricting the screen time for children under age 5 to one hour or less daily, and those under age 1 no time at all, saying that since early childhood is a period of rapid development, family lifestyle patterns should be adapted to boost health gains. Now, there is need for a 'digital wellness plan' for every family through encouragement, engagement and empowerment to help a child maintain a healthy and balanced relationship with digital technologies that supports  overall well-being.

By Archana Datta The writer is a former Director General of All India Radio, a retired Indian Information Service officer, and a media educator.; views are personal
