Category: Editorial
Title: Revolution to resurgence Irans strategic Part Two

Revolution to resurgence  -  Iran's strategic moment

The new republic drew its legitimacy from three pillars: restoring Iran's national pride, establishing theological discourse and Islamic governance, and promising economic progress and social justice. However, the 1979 hostage crisis, the eight-year Iran-Iraq war, prolonged nuclear programme-related sanctions, and support for regional militia proxies severely tested the country's economic and political resilience. Revolution 2.0 Why is the current post-war situation akin to a second revolution?

Like in 1979, this war too has led to the emergence of a stronger and a nationalist regime. However, unlike 1979, when an earlier regime had to be overthrown, this time, the regime, despite being hit badly and its Supreme Leader assassinated, has emerged stronger as it has survived. Once again, key issues such as national pride, dignity, strength and unity are being made the central pillars.

And the millions of people on the street now mirror the visuals of millions on the streets of Iran in February 1979 when they welcomed Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini after his return from exile. And, like in 1979, this revolution too promises to bring in long-lasting changes in Iran and the region. The most prominent change is obviously the security architecture.

Soon after the 1979 revolution, the nations in the Gulf had formed the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) in 1981, to forge a common platform to fight the threat from a revolutionary Iran. The region turned to the U.S. which then carried out its most extensive and permanent military deployment after the Second World War  - it stationed thousands of troops and hundreds of military assets across multiple bases, promising a security umbrella against Iran (and Iraq).

Well, this war has shattered this myth with the punishment and huge losses that American bases and the countries in the region had to suffer from Iranian strikes. Countries in the region are not only frustrated with the failed U.S. security assurances but are looking at alternatives to secure themselves in the future, including maybe, making peace with Iran.

The second issue is the regime's survival which had been at its weakest in the past few years due to economic sanctions and growing frustration within over its enforcement of Islamic laws, especially against women. The most recent protests in December 2025, ignited over severe inflation and job losses and massive devaluation of its national currency Rial (1.54 million Rials traded for one U.S. dollar) posed one of the most severe threats to the regime, one which the U.S.

too attempted to support and ignite. However, it failed as it was suppressed by a brutal crackdown by the regime. Even the slain Supreme Leader's advanced age and declining health had raised questions about the regime's ability to retain control after his death. However, those doubts have now been consigned to history, with the regime emerging stronger and more firmly in control.

The third important factor is identity. If the first revolution gave the nation a 'Religion First" ideological identity, this war has brought national pride to the fore and made it the primary agent of resilience and defiance. Iran's ability to absorb the punishment of military strikes, endure the pain and then strike back effectively, have brought people and nation together.

The fourth factor has to relate to the economy. A nation which has survived and sustained under severe economic sanctions for almost three decades, now faces a pleasant possibility of huge influx of money into its coffers thanks to a possible easing of sanctions, defreezing of assets and sale of petroleum products. The monetisation of the Strait of Hormuz is obviously a bonus and now a powerful negotiating instrument with Iran.
