Category: Editorial
Title: Ricetoethanol policy is deepening economic Part Two

Rice-to-ethanol policy is deepening economic and environmental stress

These distorted and politically motivated policies of bonuses over MSP, coupled with highly subsidised power and fertilisers, have resulted in FCI's stocks overflowing. Rather than fixing the distorted incentive structure that has created such piles of rice, the government has chosen a second exit valve: Pour it into ethanol distilleries. The ethanol blending programme is not a bad idea, in itself  -  it involves at least 20 per cent blending.

However, mandating that ethanol producers source a fixed share of feedstock from FCI rice is counterproductive. This is like going back to Soviet-era controls. Bureaucracy and politicians love controls as they benefit from rent-seeking. Industry wants freedom to choose the most efficient feedstock  -  whether maize, sugarcane, or rice  -  which government policies don't permit.

So, the two strike a deal  -  rice, whose economic cost to FCI is Rs 44/kg, is sold to ethanol plants at Rs 23/kg on the justification that it is broken and damaged. Production of a kilogram of rice requires, on average, about 4,000 litres of irrigation water. Even if one assumes half of it percolates back to aquifers, the other half is absorbed partially by the plant, and the remaining evaporates.

Transplantation, the dominant practice in rice cultivation, emits large amounts of methane, which is 25 times more potent than carbon dioxide. And when states like Punjab and Haryana use almost 250/kg of fertiliser per hectare, they emit almost 5 tonnes of carbon dioxide/ha as the plant absorbs not more than 35-40 per cent of nitrogen  -  the rest goes into the environment as nitrous oxide, which is 273 times more potent as a GHG than carbon dioxide, or leaches into groundwater, contaminating it with nitrate. The contamination has been linked to blue baby syndrome, thyroid, diabetes and increased cancer risk.

Why are we imposing such hazards on ourselves? This must change. Otherwise, a boon of technology will become a bane of humanity. Wisdom lies in changing the course of the MSP policy. No bonuses, and limit the procurement in all states to not more than 40 per cent of its production. No compulsion on ethanol plants to use rice from FCI.

Maize is a much better option for ethanol production. Limit the free supplies under PDS to only the most vulnerable  -  antyodya  -  and charge the rest at least half the MSP. Promote direct-seeded rice to conserve water. And above all, fix fertiliser-related issues by moving from subsidies to income support to farmers and decontrolling fertiliser prices.

If the Narendra Modi government can implement such reforms, it will do a great service to India's farmers and our planet. Written by: Ashok Gulati, Ritika Juneja, Purvi Thangaraj Gulati is distinguished professor, Juneja a senior fellow, and Thangaraj a consultant at ICRIER. Views are personal
