Category: Editorial
Title: Rising longevity A threat to social security Part Two

Rising longevity: A threat to social security

Given that there is a gradual shift from traditional defined benefit pension to that of individualised contribution plans, every individual is responsible to ensure a desired level of income in retirement. This has led to emphasis on savings and investment to secure own futures. Here the challenge lies in conversion of the savings into a reliable consistent source of income that can see through the later years of life.

Such a process is termed as accumulation to decumulation. This alternative is on the presumption that individual has retirement savings outside the public pension system. The reality is that an insignificant share has retirement savings and a global survey indicates that 44 per cent individual fear outliving their savings.

In fact, a substantial share of workers in Asia remains worried about becoming poor or be in need of money on retirement which ranges between 50 per cent in China and 90 per cent in Vietnam. Despite these concerns, many retirees continue to maintain their pre-retirement saving habits and tend to be quite conservative in their spending. This is largely owing to the uncertainty regarding the duration of life in retirement and there should be measures adopted to ensure a financial flow for a life time based on the savings and assets owned by retirees.

Policy options To mitigate the adverse fiscal impact of rising longevity on State finances, increasing retirement ages remains a common strategy. The current average retirement age in OECD countries is 64.7 years, which is projected to rise to 66.4 years in the future, and to 70 years or more in countries such as Denmark, Estonia, Italy, the Netherlands, and Sweden. Moreover, according to the Pensions at a Glance 2025 report of the OECD, normal retirement ages are expected to increase in 19 of the 38 OECD member countries.

In this context, India, and ageing States such as Kerala, may need to consider raising the retirement age. As fertility rates continue to decline in advanced States, such a measure could also help sustain productivity levels. However, these reforms are likely to face strong public resistance in the context of high unemployment and the expected labour market disruptions arising from the increasing adoption of artificial intelligence across industries.

Alternatively, financial sustainability can be pursued by increasing contribution rates or reducing benefit levels. The recently implemented Unified Pension Scheme (UPS) represents a step in the right direction, blending features of defined contribution systems (NPS) and the older guaranteed-benefit framework (OPS). As the RBI study cautioned, policymakers should resist political pressures to revert to unfunded guaranteed promises (OPS), which create large fiscal risks, and undermine long-term financial sustainability.

Finally, drawing from international reforms where Ireland and Korea increased contribution rates and Japan raised the contribution ceiling to mobilise more resources for their pension systems, India should similarly pursue policies to bolster its funded schemes. Specifically, India should incentivise voluntary contribution rate increases by employees and raise the contribution ceiling under schemes like the UPS and NPS. These reforms would strengthen the fiscal sustainability of the overall pension architecture.

Final thoughts The need for rethinking on longevity economy is the need of the moment. The demographic transition presents both risks and opportunities. With well-designed reforms  -  combining public policy, employer engagement and financial innovation  -  societies can support healthy ageing, protect living standards in retirement, and harness the contributions of older adults.
