Category: Editorial
Title: Rising longevity A threat to social security Part One

Rising longevity: A threat to social security

With reforms that combine public policy, employer engagement and financial innovation, societies can support healthy ageing, protect living standards in retirement The world demographics are fast changing, which will have an impact on the social and economic systems of world nations. The inevitable consequence of demographic shift is visible in the rising share of elderly population that is causing an imbalance, which needs a rethinking on sustainability front. Such an imbalance will feature in terms of the 65+ population exceeding those below eight by 2080 and by the year 2060, the Asian subcontinent would have 60 per cent of global elderly aged 65 and above.

By the middle of this century, the global strength of 65+ is projected to exceed 1.6 billion, with certain regions accounting for one in four and certain other regions one in three beyond the age of 65 years. This global transition informs that with passing of a quarter of this century, 63 countries have already peaked in population size from where there can only be a decline. However, the only solace is that these countries account for less than a third of the global population.

However, decline in population has already begun in China in 2022 which is one of the population giants but sub-Saharan Africa is adding a magnitude of 740 million working age population. These trends suggest that a traditional balance between the years spent in productive employment and retirement is somewhat shaken. Longevity challenges The period of demographic dividend typically represented by the large and increasing working age population compared to retirees has helped sustain economic growth.

But when the table turns with lowering of birth rates and increases in longevity, it poses a challenge to maintaining the resilience of the economic system. Such a demographic turnaround needs a re-evaluation of the systems of provisioning of pensions, health care, and social protection, and above all, the sustainability of economy with a growing imbalance between the consumers and the producers. This also threatens the individual pathways of life preparations where the state is in a flux to address the complex web of interdependencies of the multistage life cycle.

There is a visible lack of preparedness to face the evolving demographic shift either due to inadequate savings, lack of career flexibility, and outdated pension system with a mandated retirement age. Hence there is a need for a fresh assessment of demographic dividend devoid of the notion that ageing society poses a burden with depletion of resources and tax social services. It needs reimagining a system in which individuals contribute at various stages of life, without being constrained by fixed working years, and where social security can be recalibrated to support healthy ageing and an older workforce.

This may otherwise call for a longevity economy where the young and the old contribute in equal terms that needs to be premised on a resilient pension system. The immediate response need reforming the public retirement system in light of demographic changes that ensures financially sustainability and inclusivity to address diverse requirements. With people living longer there needs to be reassessment of retirement savings.

Creating a future-proof corpus The employers can play a crucial role towards enhancing financial wellbeing of employees through their life cycle in keeping with prospective years of retired life. With longer life span there emerges a potential role of care giving that can be a potential choice for many beyond the active working years. Systems need to evolve to support caring roles and address savings and income.
