Category: Editorial
Title: Rubio fails to win India back for Washington Part Two

Rubio fails to win India back for Washington

Finally, when given an opportunity by the Indian press to criticise Pakistan for cross-border terrorism, Mr. Rubio instead chose to praise Pakistan's role in the Iran crisis. He failed to take positions that would have reassured India that he had come to repair the relationship. Instead, the message he sent was that "America First" would be the only criterion determining U.S.

choices, not any desire to repair the U.S.-India strategic partnership. The symbolism after Mr. Rubio's return to Washington only reinforced this conclusion. Just hours later, he participated in a public Cabinet meeting. When Mr. Trump asked him about Iran, Mr. Rubio spoke about Iran, Ebola, Cuba, Venezuela, and even his stopover in Armenia, which he described as highly successful.

But he did not mention India, his meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi, or the Quad meeting. Mr. Trump did not ask about India either. This amnesia is astonishing  -  coming just hours after a visit to one of America's most important strategic partners. Nor did Mr. Trump use his social media platforms to highlight the Quad or stress the importance of repairing the U.S.- India relations.

It is precisely such indicators that make policymakers in New Delhi nervous. They signal that India's strategic significance has diminished in Washington's eyes. A partnership that still matters There remain many strategic reasons for the U.S. and India to work together: keeping the Indo-Pacific open, sustaining a partnership between major democracies in an era of rising authoritarianism, and collaborating on technological innovation, artificial intelligence, semiconductors, defence, and energy security.

These shared interests have not disappeared and may well bring the two countries back toward closer cooperation. But for now, India and the U.S. are not as closely aligned as they were a year and a half ago. If Mr. Rubio's goal was to repair the perceived damage done to India-U.S. relations since Mr.

Trump's election in 2024, he clearly failed. But if his mission was to reinforce that American foreign policy will be driven by whatever Mr. Trump defines as "America First" on any given day, then perhaps he succeeded -  making clear that American national interests are now shaped less by careful strategic thinking and more by the unpredictable thought process of President Trump.

By Muqtedar Khan Professor of International Relations at the University of Delaware, a Senior Non-Resident Fellow at the Middle East Policy Council and also host of a YouTube channel on global affairs called Khanversations
