Category: Editorial
Title: Russias top strategic partner Part Two

Russia's top strategic partner

Trump has not penalised China's bigger purchases of Russian fuel because its dominance of global supply chains and Beijing's sweeping new restrictions on exports of rare-earth, minerals, and magnet sectors would make punishing duties unsustainable for America. Unlike India, Russia and China remain anti-US. November's meetings between Russia's Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin and Chinese President Xi Jinping, and Chinese premier Li Qiang and Putin, dealt with joint military strategies and did not suggest that Russia will advise China to respect India's territorial sovereignty.

Or that India, militarily and economically weaker than China, will be able to drive a wedge between them. Moscow and Beijing are more concerned about perceived American threats to their security. China does not want Russia to lose in Ukraine because, as Foreign Minister Wang Yi told Kaja Kallas, the European Commission's Vice-President, this could allow the US "to turn its full attention to China".

The message of multipolarity brings Russia, India, and China on the same platform, but India will not be anti-American per se, no matter what its grievances against the Trump administration might be. Putin's trip to India conveyed the message that Russia was not internationally isolated. Putin said that China and India are Russia's close friends and that Moscow places "great value" on its relations with both countries.

Chinese commentators, writing in the state-steered Global Times, observe that the positive India-Russia interactions represent normal exchanges among member states of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and BRICS, contributing to the advancement of global multipolarity. What really concerns China and Russia is that the only superpower should not dominate the world. Delhi should also note Putin's reference to "Russia, India, and other like-minded nations", who are "working towards a just and multipolar world".

Putin's visit will shore up India's prestige and probably increase Russia-India trade, but not at the expense of a stronger, and therefore more useful, Chinese strategic partner. And, given the chance, India wants to strengthen ties with America economically, strategically, and socially. The author is Founding Professor, Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution, New Delhi Views are personal
