Category: Editorial
Title: Securing India against the threat of a Part One

Securing India against the threat of a 'Mythocalypse'

Claude Mythos, the world's 'most formidable hacker', needs India's urgent attention When it comes to Artificial Intelligence (AI), the United States is about six months ahead of the rest of the world. Within the U.S., Silicon Valley is six months ahead of New York, and within Silicon Valley, frontier AI companies are six months ahead of everyone else. Simple maths reveals where India stands vis-à-vis the AI frontier.

The question that should keep us awake at night is this: What about the inevitable proliferation of Mythos-class capabilities, including from labs that do not share Anthropic's restraint and from open-weight model releases over which no one has control? Anthropic says its new model, Claude Mythos, can outperform human experts at certain cybersecurity tasks. Mythos access has expanded to more countries including India and organisations, but with the U.S.

government's prior scrutiny. What happens if some non-state bad actor takes control of India's financial systems or examination systems or power plants? What can Anthropic even do? At a minimum, India should pursue a defensive AI partnership like an AUKUS Pillar 2  -  perhaps a "Defensive AI Quad" with the U.S., the United Kingdom, and Japan  -  to secure structured access to Mythos-class capabilities for testing and protecting critical infrastructure.

In return, India could contribute its threat-modelling expertise and the uniquely varied attack surfaces of the broader digital public infrastructure stack. Why Mythos matters Why is this time different  -  and potentially far more dangerous? First, most current AI models identify vulnerabilities that can be explained to and understood by humans, enabling experts to diagnose and fix them.

Mythos, however, is discovering vulnerabilities in systems that cannot always be explained, understood, or even known to exist by human operators. Second, Mythos is fundamentally different from a standard Large Language Model (LLM) because it is "zero day" at scale. A zero day is essentially an undiscovered bug or a flaw in code that no one knows exists, but when found can be exploited to devastating consequences.

With it come serious moral-hazard and national security concerns, especially when there is the prospect of selling such capabilities to the highest bidder. Now, what is even more astonishing is that Mythos' offensive capabilities were not deliberately engineered; they emerged as a byproduct of advanced reasoning, long-horizon planning, and autonomous execution. Mythos discovered long-standing bugs that had eluded human experts and automated "fuzzing" tools for decades.

For example, it discovered a 16-year-old flaw that had survived five million automated tests, as also in the Linux kernel which is the backbone of every Android device in the world. The latest update on Mythos, released on May 22, 2026, reported that it had scanned 1,000 open-source projects and flagged 23,019 vulnerabilities. Of these, 6,202 were assessed as of high-or critical-severity.

One vulnerability in wolfSSL -  CVE-2026-5194  -  could have allowed attackers to forge TLS certificates across billions of IoT and industrial devices. But the statistic that should concern policymakers most is this: barely 1% of the vulnerabilities identified by Mythos have been patched. Third, what makes Mythos more dangerous, is that unlike older models that merely flag suspicious code, Mythos can autonomously chain multiple low-severity vulnerabilities  -  issues that might otherwise be ignored  -  into a single, highly destructive attack.

Finding a vulnerability is one thing but chaining a bunch of vulnerabilities together and exploiting them autonomously is something completely different and daunting. Fourth, the barriers to entry are very low. The U.K.'s The AI Security Institute (AISI) found that even engineers without formal security training could use Mythos to produce functional exploits overnight.
