Category: Editorial
Title: Shortterm costs potential longterm gains Part Two

Short-term costs, potential long-term gains

But this is contingent on the US withdrawing restrictions on import of top-tier AI GPUs by India. If such restrictions stay in place, India's absorptive capacity to import will also remain limited. Import of products widely used by large-capacity data centres would help in faster growth of such centres in India.

It is noteworthy that Google has already invested heavily in building data centres in India. More investments for AI and data centres have been encouraged through specific incentives announced in the latest Budget. These include a 21-year tax holiday for foreign businesses using Indian data centres for providing cloud services to global customers, and a 15% "safe harbour" for resident entities providing data-centre related services for global customers.

These incentives can now motivate US AI businesses to look very closely at India, especially at a time when most of them are looking to secure returns on the large funds they have invested in developing AI innovations. The above scenario fits well with India's long-term plans to grow into an AI hub. It also creates possibilities for India becoming a key regional centre for serving global clients from its domestic capacities.

The prospect augurs well for the growth of digitally delivered service exports from India. India is currently the fourth largest exporter of such services with exports being more than $250 billion, contributed in large measure by the global capability centres in India. Materialisation of this optimistic scenario entails heavy engagement of US big tech with the Indian economy.

There are a couple of caveats here. As the joint statement suggests, "discriminatory and burdensome practices" and barriers to digital trade maintained by India will need to go. India might have to further align its domestic data protection rules with those that are enabling for US big tech. Moreover, as suggested by the statement, the speed with which the US and India align their standards and conformity assessment procedures for technology products will also determine prospects.

The content and intent of the statement of the interim US-India trade deal framework suggest higher costs for India in the short run. However, there are plausible long-term benefits if future negotiations on the BTA create enabling conditions for making India a global AI hub and a global leader in digitally powered and tech services. By Amitendu Palit, Senior Research Fellow and Research Lead (trade and investment), Institute of South Asian Studies, National University of Singapore
