Category: Editorial
Title: Shortterm costs potential longterm gains Part One

Short-term costs, potential long-term gains

Long-term gains Over time, India's imports from the US can impart a different structural character to the Indian economy and enlarge its global comparative advantages A joint statement released by the US and India confirm that they reached an interim agreement on the framework for reciprocal and mutually beneficial bilateral trade. The statement suggests this as the first step towards both countries working out a broader bilateral trade and investment agreement (BTA), for which negotiations began on February 13, 2025. For India, the immediate prospects do not appear very encouraging.

However, if certain enabling conditions are created by the BTA, then there are prospects of considerable long-term gains. Most Indian exports will face tariffs of most-favoured nation (MFN) plus 18% in the US market. Thus, Indian exports will broadly be facing as much tariffs as most of their competitors from Southeast and South Asia with marginal differences.

Compared with just the MFN tariffs that existed in February 2025, when India and the US launched negotiations, the eventual tariffs are much higher. India, however, can derive satisfaction from potential tariff removals on several exports to the US that are currently attracting Section 232 tariffs on national security grounds. These include those on aircraft and aircraft parts, as well as automotive parts, with the latter subject to a tariff rate quota.

The statement also provides hope for future removal of tariffs on Indian exports of generic pharmaceuticals. Furthermore, more tariff cuts are possible in the medium term, with the US affirming its intent to consider India's similar request during the future negotiations on the BTA. India has committed to buying $500 billion worth of products from the US, including energy, aircrafts and aircraft parts, precious metals, technology products, and coking coal.

The purchase will be over the next five years. The commitment translates into an annual average Indian import of $100 billion. It suggests a doubling of annual imports from their current value of just under $50 billion. There is short-and long-term consequences of India's commitment. The former are damaging, while the latter are more encouraging.

At the outset in the short term, the commitment is likely to result in an increase in overall volume and value of imports for the country, leading to higher goods trade deficit and current account deficit. This can be avoided if higher imports from the US substitute imports from other countries. Such possibilities might exist for certain energy products, especially coking coal.

However, volatile global energy prices might result in much more expensive energy imports by India from the US, leading to damaging economic impacts. The sharp slide of the Indian rupee against the US dollar will accentuate the impact. On the other hand, it is important to note that most of the imports from the US are unlikely to replace India's imports from China, especially electrical equipment, machinery, and chemicals.

With imports from China staying where they are, at around $125 billion, higher imports from the US will enlarge overall trade deficit. Over time, however, India's imports from the US can impart a different structural character to the Indian economy and enlarge its global comparative advantages. As India increases its imports of graphics processing units (GPUs), which are widely used for artificial intelligence (AI) applications and machine learning, they would help in accelerating the speed of AI adoption in India.
