Category: Editorial
Title: SIR and the annihilation of rights Part Two

SIR and the annihilation of rights

On the one hand, this denied attendance to many workers and on the other, it aided in newer forms of corruption. The Ministry of Rural Development has itself flagged that the NMMS is being "misused or manipulated" in several instances. Workers protested to have the app scrapped; the government instead introduced an additional digital layer of pushing workers to do an e-KYC.

With stringent targets and timelines, frontline officials had limited scope to address migration-related absences and recurring app or documentation glitches. Consequently, nearly 27 lakh deletions in just one month became the administrative route to close pending records. Constitutional morality What is eerily similar in the technocratic adventures in MGNREGA and the SIR is the structural codification of exclusions.

Even well-meaning officials are pressured to focus on dashboards and targets. Unable to cope with pressures, some have reportedly taken their own lives. And, among others, since field officials are judged based on targets such as completion rates, exclusions become a quick way to show progress. By the time the harmful consequences are known, it becomes a fait accompli.

For example, it took more than a year for the Union government to issue a standard operating procedure on worker deletions, much after the rights of millions got deleted. Also, grievance channels are inaccessible for vulnerable groups, because they require procedural agency that is rarely available. Dr.

B.R. Ambedkar stressed on the need for constitutional morality. An interpretation of this is that institutions must embody fraternity, which implies that inclusion must be the norm and exclusion the exception. But by inverting the citizen-state relationship and putting the onus of onerous documentation on people, the ECI is compromising on constitutional morality.

In turn, the polity risks the annihilation of their rights. It is still not late. As suggested by experts, social audits can be an alternative to the SIR. Chakradhar Buddha, works with LibTech India, a centre within CORD; Rajendran Narayanan teaches in Azim Premji University, Bangalore and is affiliated with LibTech India.

Views are personal
