Category: Editorial
Title: Smile stand back distract disappear The Part One

Smile, stand back, distract, disappear: The political wives' labour behind the throne

Disappear: The political wives' labour behind the throne Call it reticence or refusal; Rama Duwaji not slipping into the ceremonial template actually sits well within a spectrum where political wives negotiate visibility, often through emotional, narrative or reputational labour, by dodging, distracting, doubling down, or simply disappearing to shape the story of power Rama Duwaji may be one of the most intriguing modern political wives precisely because she refuses to perform politics. Even as Democratic Socialist leader and recently elected New York City Mayor Zohran Mamdani hogged the pop culture spotlight, with his rap video campaigns, up-to-date Gen Z lingo and a recent White House visit, Duwaji has remained conspicuous by her absence from every ceremonial frame. Duwaji, an animator, illustrator and ceramist by profession, has her Instagram page carefully curated with art and activism, and has steadfastly remained Rama Duwaji the artist and not the ostensible Gen Z First Lady, with no hint that she is married to the New York Mayor.

Call it reticence or refusal; Duwaji not slipping into the ceremonial template actually sits well within a spectrum where political wives negotiate visibility, often through emotional, narrative or reputational labour, by dodging, distracting, doubling down, or simply disappearing to shape the story of power. If Duwaji's absence looks jarring, French President Emmanuel Macron's wife, Brigitte Macron, represents the opposite end of the spectrum through her hyper-visibility. Macron shows that even when a political wife strictly adheres to the First Lady playbook, people reserve the right to redraw her womanhood itself.

For the most part, trolling her was largely restricted to the 25-year age gap between the couple, unconventionally favouring the woman. Faced with unsubstantiated claims that Brigitte was born a man surfacing in 2021, the Macrons are considering submitting photographic evidence, if necessary, to prove that Brigitte is, in fact, a woman. The couple's lawyer has called this a "distraction" for Macron, who is "juggling a career and family life." Considering that Brigitte sacrificed her teaching career to support her husband's political one and that as the French First Lady she now has a defined role in government, that her three children are extremely successful in life and that she has borne the brunt of the attention that Macron's rise to power has brought upon them, an attack on her very identity can still be unironically and uncritically reduced to a distraction for her husband.

While Macron labours through symbolic omnipresence, US President Donald Trump's wife, Melania Trump, perfects curated silence, communicating through her absences and outfits. Her "I REALLY DON'T CARE, DO U?" jacket in 2018 and perceived silence over the Rose Garden revamp comes across as a brand of aloof control. However, Melania purportedly "raising concerns privately" over the demolition of the East Wing of the White House raises the question of whether her silence is structured or strategic.

Is she really a political interlocutor or a political accessory? Is her voice, or the absence of it, indeed a controlled articulation or a loss buried under the rubble and rancour? If Melania's detachment looks like a brand, deposed Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's wife Asma al-Assad stands at the other end of the visibility spectrum, more in line with how political wives are generally criticised in the media.
