Category: Editorial
Title: Smile stand back distract disappear The Part Two

Smile, stand back, distract, disappear: The political wives' labour behind the throne

Only, she took her second shift in politics into overtime, well-paid overtime if the multiple allegations of corruption are to be believed. Her half-British identity made her much more fascinating to the Western media, with Vogue infamously calling her a "Rose in the Desert", which later transformed into the "First Lady of Hell". Asma began her career as a political wife with charity work and humanitarian missions.

Yet when the civil war broke out and she was offered safe passage by the UK government, she refused to return to the land of her birth and stood steadfastly by her husband, letting the state control her representation. Her silence looked more weaponised, designed to aestheticise authoritarian patriarchy. But what about women born entirely in privilege?

From upper-middle-class wealth in Karnataka to the power and luxury of 10 Downing Street, Akshata Murty has known little else all her life. How does one situate such a woman within the context of the second shift? There was minimal sacrificial labour in the supporting role she had in her husband's career, simply because she was very much the main character in her own.

Ostensibly a noted fashion designer, the undeniability of her would-be massive inheritance only served to diminish her husband's stature, even as the British press could not stop finding cheap humour in his non-British height. Her pride in being able to celebrate Diwali and make rasam at Downing Street, in contrast with her husband fronting a party the overwhelming mandate of which has been staunchly anti-immigration brings us to question whether this lack of self-awareness comes from a life of privilege or is it symbolic of the aspirational Indian upper middle class that looks up to the Murtys, the Ambanis and the Tatas as heroes of the nation? And then there is former US President Barack Obama's wife, Michelle Obama, who broke the silence by actually spelling out the labour of being a political spouse.

In her memoir Becoming, Michelle opened up about the impossible tightrope that wives are expected to walk, where "living under the microscope" requires an exhausting and never-ending blend of emotional, racial and reputational labour which is flawlessly yet invisibly performed. In the discourse of political second shift, Michelle is an example of how presence itself can be a form of labour. Against the backdrop of gendered labour, Duwaji's refusal to play by the book becomes fascinating.

By drawing a boundary between her artistic identity and Mamdani's political project, her silence becomes a critique of the second shift as she simply steps out of the narrative of manufactured expectation thrust upon a political wife. By By Namrata Roy and Soham Mukherjee Roy is an Assistant Editor at The Indian Express and Mukherjee is assistant professor of English at Presidency University, Bangalore
