Category: Editorial
Title: South Asia needs climate solidarity Part Two

South Asia needs climate solidarity

There have been some advancements in the form of trilateral power transactions  -  from Nepal to Bangladesh through the Indian power grid. It could also be extended, under the One Sun One World One Grid initiative, wherein Bangladesh, Bhutan, Nepal and India could pool their conventional and non-conventional electricity resources and transmit to each other during lean periods of power production within the region. Further, it carries the potential to lower the energy costs, diversify the supply of energy-poor regions, and tap renewables and low-carbon energy resources.

Ahead of COP30, South Asian Parliamentarians from Bhutan, India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Maldives endorsed the idea of a South Asian joint institutional response to climate change at a meeting held in Colombo in October 2025. The meeting organised by the South Asian Regional Parliamentary Forum for Climate, Energy and Environment also discussed the possible constitutive principles, roadmap and contours for realising SACCC. Among the many provisions, there are three themes or pillars that could serve as the contours of the proposed body: First, a regional knowledge sharing and innovation hub.

South Asia should establish regional innovation centres co-managed by multiple nations to gain from the complementarity of neighbouring countries' practice-based knowledge. For instance, Maldives can co-host a South Asia Coastal Climate Resilience Hub. Such an institution must focus on coral reef restoration, sustainable fisheries management, and renewable energy integration for maritime and coastal regions.

Meanwhile, Sri Lanka, with its Sri Lanka 30 X 30 and Life to our Mangroves (LOM), could offer expertise in nature-based solutions and complement the mitigation and adaptation to environmental and developmental challenges of the region. The region could pool in best practices from Bhutan's Gelephu Mindful City and India's Mission LiFE (Lifestyle for Environment) to scale up large-scale urban development programmes that integrate sustainable practices and economic growth. India could complement it by providing technical know-how to scale up renewable energy installation in the region.

Ongoing efforts towards power sharing and grid infrastructure between India, Bhutan, Bangladesh, and Nepal could be an added advantage. A critical second pillar could be a South Asia Green Climate Finance Facility. It is evident that translating these solutions into climate action remains contingent on the availability of finances (regional and international).

A regional financing facility is a mode of pooling financing resources, building the capacity to absorb and monitor international finance, and building a pipeline of high priority, bankable project pipelines. Involvement of multiple countries and agencies can mitigate the average risk profiles of the projects. In South Asia, this can be achieved in close coordination with multilateral agencies, such as the ADB, World Bank or Green Climate Fund.

The facility could offer a range of financial instruments  -  from bonds to risk-mitigation instruments  -  to attract international climate finance. This facility can also conceptualise and design a pool of climate action projects in the region and for the region to build a conducive environment to bring in climate finance investments. Thirdly, a Scientific Commission to offer independent advice on the type, scale and speed of climate action needed to safeguard South Asia's infrastructure, economy and people on all three fronts of resilience, mitigation and adaptation.
