Category: Editorial
Title: START is over Will a new nuclear arms race Part Two

START is over. Will a new nuclear arms race between the US and Russia take off?

Arms control agreements provide transparency; without them, clarity about the size, posture and readiness of each other's arsenals diminishes. The nuclear threshold becomes harder to read, intensifying the paradox. The third consequence concerns how other states behave. If the two countries that together account for most of the world's nuclear weapons abandon arms control altogether, nuclear proliferation elsewhere is bound to thrive.

And even while China undergoes its largest nuclear expansion, nowhere is this more immediately relevant than Iran, whose talks with the US over its nuclear programme are scheduled this week. Should the regime acquire the bomb, others in the region like Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Egypt will inevitably follow suit. An already dangerous West Asia would then find itself armed with nuclear swords pointed in multiple directions.

Former US president Ronald Reagan wrote in his memoirs that watching the film The Day After, which displayed the potential damage a nuclear exchange can cause, directly influenced his efforts at arms control and the signing of the INF with Mikhail Gorbachev. Indeed, not too long ago, the world's superpowers agreed that too many nuclear weapons posed a danger to human existence. Recalling this sentiment, Washington and Moscow will hopefully return to the negotiating table.

Trump could, at the very least, respond to Putin's extension proposal with terms of his own on reductions and inspections. Perhaps they could watch The Day After to be reminded of what is at stake. If nothing else, both states will be talking about nuclear weapons again, giving diplomacy more time and room.

But should the arms race prevail, the Doomsday Clock will only move closer and closer to midnight. Written by: Saptarshi Basak The writer is deputy copy editor, The Indian Express,
