Category: Editorial
Title: START is over Will a new nuclear arms race Part One

START is over. Will a new nuclear arms race between the US and Russia take off?

Arms race between the US and Russia take off? The dangers of having a weak arms control architecture were most recently illustrated by the 12-day war between Israel and Iran last year, which will be seen as a textbook case of conflict fuelled by an arms race The Doomsday Clock inched four seconds closer to midnight (from 89 to 85) in January. The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists warned in its latest annual assessment that the world is now closer to catastrophe than at any other point in history, noting that "Russia, China, the United States, and other major countries have become increasingly aggressive, adversarial, and nationalistic." As if that were not troubling enough, the last remaining nuclear arms control treaty between the US and Russia expired on February 4, occurring at a time when Donald Trump's erratic foreign policy requires little elaboration and Vladimir Putin appears increasingly emboldened over Ukraine.

To understand the significance of the New START (New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty), signed by then presidents Barack Obama and Dmitry Medvedev in 2010, a very brief history of arms reduction under START would help. The objective of START-I, signed in 1991, was to reduce the nuclear arsenals of the US and the Soviet Union by imposing limits on deployed warheads, launchers, and ballistic missiles, among other offensive machinery. START-II, aiming to intensify arms reduction, never actually came into force because George W Bush withdrew from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM), which angered Moscow.

Post-Cold War arms control efforts peaked under START until the signing of the New START. The new treaty has also run into difficulties, most recently in 2023, when Russia suspended inspection activities under New START amid its war in Ukraine. In September last year, Vladimir Putin proposed a one-year voluntary extension, but negotiations appear to be far away.

With other long-standing arms control treaties like the ABM and the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) having already collapsed, there are now effectively no legally binding limits on the US and Russia expanding their nuclear arsenals. The consequences of such a hollowed-out arms control architecture are dangerous, and three, in particular, warrant close attention. First, in the absence of limits, and in a world that is more dangerous this year than the last, both sides have incentives to expand their nuclear stockpiles.

Basic international relations theory suggests that an increase in arms by one country is likely to provoke a response from its rival, which perceives it as an emerging offensive threat, and the situation becomes what scholars call a security dilemma. In October last year, Trump announced that he had directed the resumption of nuclear weapons testing in the US for the first time in over three decades. Should Washington follow through on any such programme, it could trigger an arms race that would only raise the probability of war, particularly between nuclear and non-nuclear powers.

The dangers were most recently illustrated by the 12-day war between Israel and Iran last year, which will be seen as a textbook case of conflict fuelled by an arms race. The second consequence is what international relations scholar Glenn Snyder termed the stability-instability paradox: While the risk of direct war between nuclear-armed states may be reduced by the fear of nuclear retaliation, the likelihood of low-intensity conflicts and proxy wars may increase. States assume that as long as they remain below the nuclear threshold, escalation to catastrophic levels can be avoided.
