Category: Editorial
Title: The limits of middle powers Part Two

The limits of middle powers

Their diverse interests would reduce the chances for collective middle-power bargaining. Each middle power would find its own way and engage in diplomatic hedging - implying a mix of cooperation and confrontation. Rising powers' Russia ties complicate Western outreach At another level, the second concern is about developing countries, some of which - including India, Indonesia, and Vietnam - are perceived as rising powers.

Each has strong ties with Russia. This points to the difficulties highly industrialised Western states have sometimes had in winning their support. On another plane are rich middle powers willing to accept geoeconomic bargains to decrease their dependence on the US and China. After all, domestic wrangles over trade usually stem from related political and economic differences, not merely from the wishes of political leaders regarding the upholding of international norms.

Generally, Carney's vision offers no suggestions for managing geopolitical competition. Short-term, ad hoc coalitions cannot craft or deliver international rules. International organisations based on universal membership will remain essential for resolving these dilemmas. Recently, Canadian and British hopes of improving relations with China came up against the reality that it is the world's biggest mercantilist power.

It has a heavily subsidised dynamic industrial and export sector. Economic policies that restrict consumption and boost production add up to mercantilist behaviour that makes China unreliable at best, and even irresponsible. For the UK and Germany, China may be a more predictable trade partner than the US right now, but it is not, as Carney claimed, a more reliable partner.

That is evident from the erection of trade barriers against cheap Chinese exports by more than 50 rich middle countries. Moreover, does any democracy really want a Chinese totalitarian state - a security threat to its neighbours - to dominate a new world order? As for India and the EU, one can only hope that what European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen has hailed as "the world's largest democracies, committed…to shape a new global order", will be proven right and that any trade deal between India and Trump's US will not upset their apple cart.

That will indeed mark a success for two middle powers. By Anita Inder Singh The author is Founding Professor, Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution, New Delhi.
