Category: Editorial
Title: The fading of Indias environmental Part Two

The fading of India's environmental jurisprudence

It was due to the need to circumvent this reductionist strategy that the Court relied on the precautionary principle, in Vellore Citizens' Welfare Forum vs Union of India and Others (1996), rejecting the idea of any artificial limit. The strange acceptance by the top court of the 100-metre definition, in In Re: Issue Relating to Definition of Aravalli Hills and Ranges (2025), marked a clear departure from the position taken in 2010. In trying to keep landforms above a predetermined elevation as the sole subject of legal protection, the Court has efficiently deprived the Aravalli ranges of any statutory and judicial protection over large portions.

Such a change has serious constitutional implications. The right to a clean and healthy environment, which has been broadly understood in the application of Article 21, is directly involved. Article 48A, which requires the state to ensure the conservation and the enhancement of the environment, is now a hollow proclamation in instances where the interpretation of the law by the judiciary can promote rather than safeguard ecological exclusion.

In fact, India's courts have been more enthusiastic about cow slaughter (Article 48) and uniform civil code (Article 44). The discriminatory protection or preservation of some landforms in relation to their height creates an absurd classification that has no rational nexus to ecological goals. An interpretation of a law that safeguards outstanding hills and exposes the surrounding ecosystems to exploitation contravenes the principle of non-arbitrariness that forms the core of Article 14.

A leniency This watering down of environmental protection is seen not only in the case of the Aravallis. This has been the case over years with courts and regulatory bodies supporting development projects based on the assurance of mitigation instead of their enforcing environmental norms to the letter. This is evident in the undermining of the EIA process and the legalisation of post-facto and conditional clearances, even after the judicial warnings.

In Common Cause vs Union of India (2017), the Court had made it clear that the legalisation of illegal mining and environmental offences could not be done after the fact, and that the environmental law is to serve as a deterrent. But judicial leniency later in regard to lapses in procedure corresponds to a slow weakening of this principle. The results of this kind of dilution are seen in cases of coastal urban ecology, especially the mangroves of Mumbai.

Mangroves are multi-layered ecosystems which act as natural flood control systems, sinks of carbon and reservoirs of biodiversity. They protect against storm surges and tidal flooding. Continued judicial authorisations to fell (and transplant) about 34,000 mangrove trees to build infrastructure are a setback.

Allowing mangrove destruction on a large scale on the 'promise of compensatory afforestation' marks the destruction of ecological science and constitutional responsibility. It requires decades to develop mature mangrove ecosystems, which cannot be compensated by having a plantation drive in some other place. Another example is the Char Dham highway project in Uttarakhand.

A June 2025 study identified 811 landslide zones along the Char Dham project. The Himalayan ecosystem is one of the most delicate in the world, and the road widening project on such a large scale has grave dangers  -  triggering landslides and disturbing rivers. In Citizens for Green Doon vs Union of India (2021), the Court recognised the ecological importance of the area, but still allowed wider roads on the grounds of strategic defence needs.
