Category: Editorial
Title: The approaching AI surge its global Part Three

The approaching AI surge, its global consequences

There are unlimited possibilities in the doomsday scenario of autonomous drone swarms unleashing attacks on crowds, killing hundreds, if not, thousands. Both the military and security establishments would seek to equip themselves with such devices in a few years. AI would then be well set to become the greatest force amplifier in history.

Its impact could range from wars and accidents, to random terror groups, to counter-revolutionary forces, and the like. The blunt truth is that nobody knows when, if how, AI might overtake or eclipse humans, and become an autonomous force for good or evil. It is also becoming evident that, apart from the battlefield, AI is now becoming an instrument of immense value in different spheres of human activity including diplomacy and intelligence.

In that sense, it is no longer merely a tool. Concerns that technologies such as AI would outpace institutions meant to govern them are real, but the most spectacular demonstration of AI is as yet on the battlefield  -  as seen across western Europe and West Asia. In both sectors, space, cyber and electronic warfare capacities have been woven together to completely transform the nature of warfare itself.

Need for effective oversight The obiter dictum  -  given that AI enables rapid data processing and predictive analysis, and also provides opportunities for a variety of options, including crisis response, conflict prevention, and conflict resolution  -  is that humankind must develop a set of checks and balances to prevent AI from 'running away with the bit in its mouth'. Scientists, political leaders and others must come together to understand the implications of runaway AI technologies and decide how to keep them under control and in a manner that they benefit, rather than become a threat to, humankind. M.K.

Narayanan is a former Director, Intelligence Bureau, a former National Security Adviser, and a former Governor of West Bengal
