Category: Editorial
Title: The debate over economic data Part Two

The debate over economic data

And the compositional changes from corporate to retail credit that drove growth in the 2010s were ignored. Positive discrepancies in the expenditure approach are seized upon as suggesting growth is over-estimated. But they are as often negative, which suggests the opposite. In Q3 FY24 a rise in net taxes above the average of 8 per cent of GDP was used to argue that high GDP growth was an aberration and actual growth was closer to the lower gross value added (GVA) growth.

But in Q1 and Q2 FY26 net taxes were below 8 per cent and growth rates of both GDP and GVA were high. Then attention turned to a low price deflator as the reason why high real growth was illusory. If inflation is actually higher than measured, real GDP growth would be lower. Nominal output was thought to be more robust since it is at least measured, while real output is extracted.

But measured nominal growth could have fallen if real growth was indeed lower. That the IMF gave a C to national accounts estimation was underlined, but the overestimation of real growth argument depends on errors in inflation estimates. So the IMF's B for this weakened the argument. No one alleged inflation was overestimated in periods when it was higher (2020- 23), since then it would have implied growth was underestimated.

Apart from these selective spotlights, there is also an argument that growth has been overestimated ever since the pandemic because ratios based on the formal sector are used to estimate informal sector output that has actually shrunk. But in the 2011-12 rebasing weights were given to different types of labour skills to estimate the output of unorganised (informal) manufacturing, replacing the GVA per uniform worker used earlier. So the ratios used do reflect some informal sector differences.

The production approach is regarded as more reliable and is used as the controlling total. The expenditure approach serves as an alternative check. It partially uses commodity flows, which is a different data set, based on the actual movement of commodities consumed, etc. Informal sector commodity use would also be captured.

The difference in this method from the production approach is given as a discrepancy that is sometimes positive and sometimes negative, implying there is no systematic bias in any one direction. A negative discrepancy means the expenditure estimate exceeded the production estimate and was reduced to equal the production measure. The sum of discrepancies was negative (₹ - 8,85,934 crore) over Q1 FY21 to Q2 FY26, implying underestimation of production.

Moreover, household expenditure, which includes the informal sector, is measured as a residual since data is better for government and corporate expenditure. So it is quite likely to be an underestimate. Feasible improvements Valid criticisms are being acted on. These include re-basing to a more recent period, use of more frequent surveys, more datasets, double deflation for manufacturing where disaggregated WPI indices are available.

Regular ASUSE surveys will replace use of ASI ratios in services. Proposed reforms are transparently communicated and feedback invited. Discrepancies varied from a max of 3.3 and a min of -4.1 as a percentage of GDP from 2020-21 onwards and should shrink as expenditure data improves. If the revisions reduce sources of both under-and over-estimation, the overall change is unlikely to be large.
