Category: Editorial
Title: The approaching AI surge its global Part One

The approaching AI surge, its global consequences

With AI disrupting global power, warfare and governance, the issue is whether humanity can keep pace with a set of checks and balances in place If there is a single technology that promises to unravel the present and usher in a new era, the bet would be on Artificial Intelligence (AI). At the very least, AI is set to effect a transformation that is comparable to any previous revolution, not excluding the Industrial Revolution. Impressive Large Language Models (LLMs) are already rolling out faster than one would have imagined possible.

Rivalry between the United States and China in this area has become intense and the success of recent Chinese models is having a catalytic effect on the AI industry as a whole. This is, however, only the beginning. All this has special relevance to a world which Canadian Prime Minister, Mark Carney, described in his address to the World Economic Forum (WEF) in Davos (in January this year), as follows: "...

We are in the midst of a rupture, not a transition... great powers have begun using economic integration as weapons, tariffs as leverage, financial infrastructure as coercion, supply chains as vulnerabilities to be exploited". Mr. Carney did not, however, touch on potentially the greatest disruptor of all, viz., AI, or refer to the baneful/beneficial influence of AI which is already beginning to impact today's world.

When he talked of great power rivalry, and that countries in between have a choice, there was no mention of AI and what impact it would have on today's world, and more so in the future. Face the reality World leaders must, however, wake up to this new reality, and come to terms with a phenomenon in which Open AI is beginning to consume the world. There is little realisation that the transformation that is taking place is almost certain to turn the world upside down.

When Mr. Carney stated that 'we are in the midst of a rupture and not a transition', he did not have in mind  -  and probably realised even less  -  that it is the advent of AI, rather than other aspects, that is likely to herald the collapse of the international order as we know it. Few leaders currently understand the extent of the threat posed by AI to the world as we know it.

Some industry leaders such as Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella have pointed out that AI was already being used as tools of diplomacy and state-craft, and that nations require to build resilience and sovereign stacks. AI did figure in discussions at the WEF, but the contents of the debate hardly mirrored the dangers arising from unchecked AI. A great deal of the debate turned on how countries were placed to exploit this new phenomenon, with Union Minister for Electronics and Information Technology, Ashwini Vaishnaw taking time off to rebut the presumption that India was a secondary AI power.

Industry leaders, no doubt, increasingly see AI as a strategic enabler, given that digital transformation is helping to reshape competitiveness across different sectors  - from fintech to health care. Additionally, there is some realisation that AI's potential extends to other sectors as well. The judicial fraternity, for one, however, believes that there is a need to be more cautious about the use of AI in court proceedings, and that excessive reliance on AI in court rooms could lead to misjudgment.
