Category: Editorial
Title: The missing workforce in Indias EV transition Part Two

The missing workforce in India's EV transition

The transition to electric mobility also presents an opportunity to address long-standing gaps in workforce participation within the automotive sector. Historically, occupations across vehicle servicing, repair, and transport operations have remained overwhelmingly shaped by patriarchal values, and much more needs to be done in terms of critical thinking and promoting a conducive environment to reverse the exclusion of women. As a matter of fact, the evolving nature of EV technologies has the potential to diversify the workforce, and it is imperative to address structural and socio-economic barriers to facilitate women's participation across the value chain.

Realising this opportunity will require deliberate policy interventions rather than assuming that inclusion will occur organically. Targeted skilling programmes, financial support for women-led enterprises, mentorship networks, and gender-responsive workplace practices can enable greater participation in emerging roles. Several state policies have already begun recognising this need.

For instance, Tamil Nadu's EV policy provides enhanced training incentives for women and other underrepresented groups, signalling a significant shift towards embedding equity within workforce development and the deployment of human capital. Integrating women into the EV ecosystem from its formative stages will not only strengthen labour force participation but also contribute to a more resilient and inclusive mobility transition. A sustainable transition is not only about reskilling and upskilling the existing workforce but also about creating a more inclusive and responsible EV ecosystem.

Reflecting on emerging initiatives demonstrating an inclusive transition may open the way for deeper reflection and innovation. Social enterprises such as eBik have enabled street vendors, waste pickers, and daily wage workers to adopt affordable electric mobility solutions, improving productivity and reducing physical strain. Internationally, Singapore's Progressive Wage Model illustrates how linking skills development with wage progression and career mobility can support workforce transitions.

Together, these examples highlight the value of replication. As India stands at the threshold of significant EV adoption and mainstreaming in the mobility sector, industry, O&M, academia, and think tanks need to deliberate on and demonstrate viable EV transition models that are both environmentally sustainable and socially inclusive. A sustainable transition is not only about reskilling and upskilling the existing workforce but also creating a more inclusive and responsible EV ecosystem.

Pondering over emerging initiatives demonstrating an inclusive transition may open a space for a deeper reflection and innovation Jayanta Mitra is Senior Fellow, Electricity & Renewables, at TERI. Gati Kochar is a Consultant at TERI; Views presented are personal.
