Category: Editorial
Title: The battle for the soul of AI Part Two

The battle for the soul of AI

Third, just like humans, the AI might make a "mistake" when confronting real-world complexities, preventing the AI from fully understanding the implications of its actions. Fourth, the possibility of structural risks where no one AI model is to blame but yet harm has resulted. In his article, Amodei too warns of the unparalleled harm that can result from AI in various ways: autonomy risks where AI can have malicious intentions and goals of its own; malicious actors can take hold of AI for destruction  -  he talks, for instance, of a dictator or an evil rogue building an AI model and using it to gain decisive, dominant power over the world; and vast disruption to the global economy, causing mass unemployment and radically concentrating wealth in the hands of a few.

Amodei and Suleyman have urged that while AI is still evolving and growing up (in an adolescent stage!), the world must strive hard to regulate its growth within moral boundaries. AI is too powerful a technology, and its capabilities too far-reaching for its control to be left entirely in the hands of private actors. Nor can governments be at liberty to deploy it for questionable objectives like mass surveillance or autonomous weapons, the very things Anthropic objected to.

AI is like a public good; civil society must necessarily get involved and be vigilant about its misuse. While the AI technology is still evolving and growing, preventive steps need to be instituted at this stage. First, at the technological level itself, the models must be trained with moral guard rails factored in and by incorporating suitable access controls.

Audit systems, both voluntary and mandatory, have to be developed to ensure transparency and accountability. AI labs and businesses have to agree to built-for-purpose standards and standard operating procedures. While deploying AI, businesses should incorporate red lines for containing its misuse. Governments, without interfering in ways that can freeze efficiency and competition, must institute just the right amount of regulation  -  blocking paths that could lead to destructive misuse.

Just as with other path-breaking technologies (eg. nuclear power), which can be used immensely beneficially as well as dangerously, global consensus and cooperation are essential. An international oversight agency like the International Atomic Energy Agency should be established for AI, armed with adequate powers of inspection and regulation.

As Amodei has noted: Humanity needs to wake up. By VINOD DHALL Former head, Competition Commission of India, and Secretary, Government of India
