Category: Editorial
Title: The fading of Indias environmental Part One

The fading of India's environmental jurisprudence

The higher judiciary appears to be aiding a watering down of environmental protection From its Aravalli ranges to its mangroves, India is at the same moral crossroads that Amitav Ghosh captures in The Hungry Tide, where the tides remember what the law chooses to forget. If environmental justice continues to be diluted in the name of development, the Constitution of India risks becoming a silent witness to ecological loss, where the consequences, like the tide itself, will return with unforgiving force. On December 18, 2025, for non-coal mining projects, the policy of land acquisition first and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) later was changed.

Now, an EIA can be done without details about the location and area. The Supreme Court of India helped in the dilution of environmental justice by recalling the case, Vanashakti vs Union Of India (2025) that banned retrospective environmental clearances. Within five months, a Bench led by (then) Chief Justice of India (CJI) B.R.

Gavai, recalled the progressive judgment. From mountains to mangroves Recent developments indicate a slow, but systematic, dilution of ecological protection. The CJI, Justice Surya Kant, suo motu, stayed the controversial order, saving the reputation of the Court. But the debate concerning the Aravallis is not just about a technical argument on definition.

It marks a paradigm change in the perception of development, the role of the environment, and the constitutional obligation by the state. Similarly, the judicial sanctions to the destruction of 158 mangroves for Adani Cementation Limited (2025) in Raigarh, Maharashtra, and the new environmentally unfriendly infrastructure schemes such as the Char Dham highway in the Himalayas, highlight a dangerous trend  -  that the health of the environment is further being undermined by the government whose proximity with the corporate world is an open secret though it is also true that the private sector has been severely criticised in the annual Economic Survey presented in January 2026. The Aravallis, traditionally acknowledged as the ecological backbone of north-western India, play a vital role which includes checking desertification, enhancing the recharge of groundwater, controlling micro-climates and maintaining biodiversity.

Interestingly, the Court itself has recognised this ecological role. In M.C. Mehta vs Union of India and Ors. (2004), a ban was imposed on mining in the Aravalli region. Later orders that culminated in the year 2010 admitted that unregulated mining in the area had had irreparable effects on the environment.

More importantly, in these proceedings, the Court quashed efforts to restrict the Aravallis to a definition based on the landform's height, especially the suggestion that only landforms over 100 metres could be a component of the Aravalli ranges. The Court realised how such a strict interpretation would ignore huge tracts of ecologically crucial land, thus foiling the objective of environmental conservation. The 100m norm was discarded in 2010 on an ecological basis.

The hills and ridges at a low altitude are of significant importance in the preservation of groundwater and soil stability in the semi-arid landscapes. The Aravallis are not just a cluster of isolated peaks but are a geomorphological system. Unfortunately, the latest height-centric definition does not pay attention to crucial factors such as hydrology, biodiversity and ecological interdependence.
