Category: Editorial
Title: The need to study war for peace Part Two

The need to study war for peace

Aumann explained conflicts and cooperation using repeated games where players have incomplete information. A might not know how many weapons B has, leading to games of secrecy and spying. In such games, even if A figures out the weapons that B has, A does not know how to infer and react to the information.

In his Nobel Prize Lecture titled "War and Peace", Aumann noted that "wars have been with us since the dawn of civilisation". The question is, why does the rational human go to war? Unlike most thinkers who say war is irrational, Aumann says war is rational. So we should study wars and that will hopefully lead to peace.

He goes on to explain that in repeated games, there is a likelihood that peace will emerge as a solution if both A and B play peace in each game. He adds that the key to war and peace is low discount rates. If the leaders have high discount rates - that is they value the present over the future - there will be wars.

He sums up the paradox, saying: "If you want peace now, you may well never get peace. But if you have time - if you can wait - that changes the whole picture; then you may get peace now." Schelling's Nobel lecture titled "Sixty years after Hiroshima" wonders how the world avoided another nuclear explosion. It partly had to do with leaders having low discount rates, which is being threatened now.

To sum up, the 2005 Nobel economics award offers many lessons to understand today's conflict-ridden world. It is ironical that Alfred Nobel, the inventor of dynamite, announced a peace prize to safeguard his legacy. He also wouldn't have imagined that nearly 70 years later, another prize, that too in economics, will be awarded in his memory.

Economics was still emerging as a discipline when Nobel announced his original five prizes. However, he would have likely been impressed to note that the work of two recipients contributed extensively to analysing war and peace. By Amol Agrawal, the author teaches at National Institute of Securities Markets
