Category: Editorial
Title: The universalisation of AI Part Two

The universalisation of AI

As AI gets 'universalised', the workstation scenario would again change drastically, and sharing will remain necessary even in the emerging context. Institutional collaboration would become much more prominent in the years ahead. In the changed environment, the quality of education, particularly of innovations and research, must attract serious attention.

During the period 2002-25, the IITs collectively applied for 6,558 patents, and got 2,806 approved. During the same period, the deemed to be university that attracted attention because of the Robot Dog applied for 2,233 patents, got only 2 approved! The comparative success rates are 42.8 and 0.8 per cent!

This is an eye-opener for the regulatory bodies in higher education. AI is now knocking at the doors of every learning place-every school and university! The elusive - vehemently assured and repeatedly promised - equality of opportunity is not achieved merely by providing access and enrolment! India's initiatives in AI are being globally appreciated; our higher education institutions are moving ahead in the right direction with reasonably acceptable speed.

The nation must ensure that the lack of resources does not impede the pace of change, and the intent of the NEP-2020 is put into practice, forgetting avoidable differences that creep in for non-academic considerations. The NEP-2020 assures the availability of motivated, energised and capable faculty. After five years of implementation, the scenario is still deficient in the availability of adequate faculty even in central government-managed institutions.

The availability of faculty in state-managed universities is, to say the least, disappointing. In most of the cases, the Vice-Chancellor requires permission from the State government secretariat to make any appointment, even against the posts that are already sanctioned to the university! Most of these universities are starved of resources, both of infrastructure and personnel.

Autonomy -exceptions apart - stands reduced to a cypher. About the private 'deemed universities', less said the better. The minority institutions established under the constitutional provisions are practically 'islands in isolation', they manage things in their own way. If the universalisation of AI is to be achieved without depriving a sizeable number of young persons in higher education, even the school teachers have to be in a position on a regular basis, and in the right teacher-taught ratio!

One of the disturbing aspects that directly and adversely impacts the quality is the decline in the credibility of the regulatory bodies across the board. Universities are the places where morals, ethics, values, national ethos, respect for diversity and much more are learned, apart from the prescribed syllabi! This just cannot be ignored!

All these aspects are being mentioned as significant tangible pedagogical changes are already taking place at each stage, and at an unprecedented pace. Whatever is accepted in the policy must be put into practice in full and at the earliest. There are issues of equity and inclusion that just cannot be addressed if the gap in the quality of education imparted in institutions of higher education remains too glaringly disturbing!

A nation that has created IISc, IITs, IIMs, just can't afford universities that may not have even a regularly appointed faculty of a couple of academics! There are several other implications that could impact the employment scenario, social context, and aspects related to socio-cultural implications. The central government, through its various bodies and institutions, launched several varied encouraging programmes for orienting and re-orienting academics, which have created positive impacts, but institutions need an adequate number of academics also to ensure quality, innovations and excellence.
