Category: Editorial
Title: The Mecca Pact and the rise of strategic Part Two

The Mecca Pact and the rise of strategic hedging

However, Türkiye and Pakistan share borders with Iran with complementary interests in keeping their restive minorities inhabiting the border regions in check. They thus have strong reasons to avoid confrontation with Tehran. Israel is likely to view the development with greater concern. One of its enduring strategic advantages has been the political and military fragmentation of the Muslim world.

The Mecca agreement does not explicitly create an anti-Israeli alliance. Nevertheless, an institutionalised relationship combining Saudi financial power, Turkish conventional strength and Pakistani nuclear capability inevitably alters strategic calculations. For Washington, the pact presents a paradox.

The U.S. has long demanded that regional partners assume greater responsibility for their own defence. But greater responsibility can also produce greater strategic autonomy and consequently diminish American leverage. Put together by regional powers It would be premature to describe the agreement as an anti-American realignment.

Saudi Arabia continues to depend heavily upon American military technology and security guarantees; Türkiye remains in NATO; and Pakistan has no interest in unnecessary confrontation with Washington in the midst of their current love fest. The more appropriate description is **strategic hedging**. But when several major states begin hedging simultaneously, their cumulative actions can transform the regional order.

For most of the modern era, West Asian security arrangements have been created or guaranteed by outside powers. The Mecca pact raises the possibility of something different: a more autonomous security architecture constructed by regional powers themselves. India, with enormous economic, energy and strategic stakes in West Asia, cannot remain a spectator to that transformation but, at the same time, should not react to it with undue alarm.

Writer: Mohammed Ayoob  -  University Distinguished Professor Emeritus of International Relations, Michigan State University; author most recently of From Regional Security to Global IR (2024)
