Category: Editorial
Title: The nut paradox of democracy Part One

The nut paradox of democracy

Nuts are safer in democracies than in other forms of government One of the most difficult but largely successful endeavours of human societies, throughout history, has been to prevent the wrong sort of person, a nut, from becoming the head of the government. And, by and large, various societies have done a great job of this. But, every now and then, completely unexpectedly, a total nut becomes the head of the government.

It always shocks everyone. After all, no security system is totally foolproof. That, however, is to be expected and not very important. What is important is that each of these nuts has always completely rebooted the existing systems. Nothing is ever the same again after they have gone. It doesn't matter if things become worse or better after their rule.

What matters is that things have changed. The list of such rulers given below is far from complete or chronological. But it illustrates my point that nuts cause irrevocable change. Not just that. In the last 1,500 years these nuts have been almost entirely from the West, or of white people. Not all these rulers were clinically insane but they were close enough as to not matter.

However, it is a thin line between being properly mad or being highly eccentric, mercurial, impetuous, narcissistic, spoiled and so on. The nut list George the Third of England was probably bipolar but who knows what it actually was. Everyone thought he was mad. He began the fight with England's American colonies and ended up losing them in 1775 when the Americans declared independence.

The world has never been the same again, that too in such a lot of ways that you can take your pick about whether you like the changes or not. France was not much better. It had a king, Charles the Sixth who signed away the French throne to Henry V of England. Imagine that. Just gifted it to a arch enemy.

Napoleon, also a Frenchman, wasn't mad in the sense old Georgie Porgie was but he also wanted total control, first of France and then of Europe. He even attacked Egypt in 1798 although he wasn't the president. No one knows why. But it helped him personally because he came back to France and grabbed power.

Spain was really unlucky. It had three crazy monarchs. Austria, too, had one. All these fellows pretty much wrecked their kingdom and its economy. They also changed European equations forever. Then there was that German king, Kaiser Wilhelm II. He started World War I in 1914 because he was insanely jealous of his cousin, who was King of England.

This, when the British empire was at its peak. No surprise that he lost the war and had to go into exile. The world changed massively after that. Germany soon produced another even bigger nut. Fifteen years after the Kaiser ran off in 1918, it elected Adolf Hitler. This guy started World War II and again changed the world forever in ways that are still affecting it.

Nuclear weapons are a case in point. Closer home we have been extraordinarily lucky to have had just one crazy ruler, Muhammad bin Tughlak. He was cruel, generous, temperamental, mercurial, rational, religious, etc., but, ultimately, a fool. He has been described by historian P Bhaskar Reddy as being "hot-headed, proud to the very core, poor judge of human nature and above all never bothered to give weight and value to the suggestions given by his ministers." Ahem!
