Category: Editorial
Title: The law and politics of climate reparations Part Two

The law and politics of climate reparations

Nepal can access the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage and the Santiago Network by submitting a well-documented post-disaster needs assessment, and through these channels would likely mobilise resources more quickly. Several States offered assistance to Nepal in disaster relief, but it initially rejected aid from foreign personnel. This reflects Nepal's sensitivities and security concerns.

Yet, international law emphasises cooperation. The International Law Commission's 2016 Draft Articles on the Protection of Persons in the Event of Disasters affirm that the affected State must seek external assistance where a disaster manifestly exceeds its national response capacity (Article 11); and it cannot arbitrarily refuse aid (Article 13). The legal question is whether Nepal's decline was arbitrary in light of its own capacity to respond.

India's assistance aligned with the 1950 Treaty of Peace and Friendship, the open-border regime, and the regional disaster treaty  -  the SAARC Agreement on Rapid Response to Natural Disasters, 2011. However, India has not officially recorded this relief effort as a practice under any treaty. Besides, the India-Nepal Joint Committee on Water Resources and its Joint Committee on Inundation and Flood Management already exist, and real-time hydrological data are shared on river systems.

From an international law perspective, India's efforts not only demonstrate its regional solidarity but also advance its restitution efforts, and what is practically possible for India to do given its own national circumstances. The politicisation of climate justice, including international responsibility and reparations, is attracting global attention. If Nepal is committed to holding States responsible, it will have to adopt a dual approach: building scientific evidence and pursuing long-term climate justice through systemic reform.

Regardless, Nepal should first seek relief through existing mechanisms like the Loss and Damage Fund. Second, it should commission attribution studies to build science. Thirdly, understand and use the option of domestic litigation to secure relief for Nepal. And finally, work with State coalitions to strengthen international mechanisms for financial support after such crises.

For India, the lesson is parallel: formalise its existing relations with Nepal and other States to establish its rules for climate cooperation. By Chhaya Bhardwaj & Shashank Pandey, Bhardwaj is Associate Professor, OP Jindal Global University; Pandey is a lawyer specialising in climate law & climate finance
