Category: Editorial
Title: The approaching AI surge its global Part Two

The approaching AI surge, its global consequences

They point to the dangers of 'hallucinations' which could lead to improper citations and fabricated judgments. Marching ahead across domains All this, however, is but a precursor to what the real potential and danger posed by AI in the world of tomorrow are. As AI proliferates globally, it is already becoming evident that few technologies have the potential to exert the same degree of influence in terms of enhancing information flows, surveillance capabilities, revolutionising of communications, empowering analytical frameworks and the military-industrial segment.

No other area of technology seems to have such a profound impact on existing civilisational networks. In this sense, AI portends a breaching of certain limits that had existed since the Second World War and the overweening threat posed by technology and its utilisation in different domains. What is noteworthy is that AI operates at granular levels  -  and that the technology itself is undergoing a phased transition.

In its present form, AI is already enabling the replication of speech and language, vision and reasoning, but what is little realised is that it is set to achieve new and dangerous heights of capabilities. This is specially so in regard to military and defence applications, for as AI becomes increasingly militarised, warfare itself is bound to  -  and is already undergoing  -  a paradigm shift from man to unmanned platforms, and from dependence on human-controlled systems to autonomous ones, that are capable of making their own decisions. Even as AI is set to become all pervasive, its transformative impact on warfare, especially in the area of the evolution of weapon systems, is what is most worrisome.

AI has made possible the deployment of unmanned aerial vehicles that are capable of autonomous flight. AI-driven cyber weapons and uncrewed ground vehicles equipped with intelligent navigation and targeting capabilities are already a reality. Both represent a paradigm shift in redefining combat, and employing operations across multiple systems without direct human intervention.

As of today, AI offers unprecedented opportunities for the enhanced automation of operational decisions in areas of conflict, and of transforming battlefield dynamics. Already, the portrayal of Ukrainian soldiers wearing night vision goggles, riding 'Quad bikes' to protect the capital city of Kiev, and launching 'jerry-rigged drones' equipped with small explosives, has become the defining image of future conflicts. Ukraine's success in checking and keeping at bay the mighty Russian Army in the first wave of Russia's attacks on Ukraine, employing the latest AI technology, marks the most fundamental change in tactics of warfare since the advent of tanks at the end of the First World War.

Ukraine's response has demonstrated the value of 'coming age technology', and how their skilful use could undermine conventional military capabilities. It is the hugely asymmetric impact that AI commands, that is both its strength and its danger portent. Though this is not being openly mentioned or touted, the reality is that it represents a colossal transfer of power from the traditional military to others, who have the capacity to develop and utilise AI devices.

The real danger is that AI could very soon eclipse the smartest individuals, and nobody can or will know, when they become autonomous, and totally out of human control. The dystopian impact of a powerful set of technologies which are not under the control of a human body or entity, and of self-sustaining technology, portrays a doomsday scenario. The beginnings of this are already evident, and are set to escalate enormously to the next levels of the concentration of power.
