Category: Editorial
Title: The next big commodity is the mineable self Part Two

The next big commodity is the mineable self

But even they imagine the larger world through their own lenses. So, "local" news is often a prismatic refraction of global issues, in a manner that changes the texture of locality, which is no longer bound by the parochial, the proximate and the familiar. Thus, locality regarding the news is no longer what it used to be.

Nor is the global its simple antonym. The market for stories, whether of the real or of the less real, occupies a new geography which cannot be captured by opposing the global and the local. This development drives the transformation of the self into the newest form of raw material, a new horizon for extraction, exploitation and commodification.

In this new market, everyone has a story, including ordinary humans (who still are the reference point of what used to be called human interest), but also banks, nations, sports teams, genders (old and new), corporations, and franchises and cities among other social forms. This multiplication of the "I" and the "Me" is discernible even in the twilight zone of AI, where Siri, ChatGPT and numerous bots are in the race to display the same emotions, intuitions and vulnerabilities as any garden variety human can do. The strange symbiosis between the mineable self, the rebooted idea of locality and the story market can be better understood by looking at the single biggest force in the story market today, which is OTT (Over the Top) streaming, the entertainment technology of choice for such giants as Netflix, Amazon Prime, Disney and other companies in this market.

The character of streaming It is widely known that streaming, driven by OTT technologies, which rely only on the Internet, and not on prior media infrastructures, is colonising much of the market previously dominated by big studios, their business models, their modes of distribution and their approaches to branding, promotion and audience-building. Perhaps the biggest element of this booming story economy is the rise of "unknowns", mid-market actors and characters who appear to be woven into modest parts of professional life and seem extraordinarily ordinary. In India, a streaming market that Netflix CEO Reed Hastings claimed in 2018 would bring his company a 100 million subscribers.

This trend highlights a more general global trend toward the democratisation of the self, a not entirely positive phenomenon. The rise of the self is sometimes as seen as an expression of the best of enlightenment values, another face of the rise of the individual, of personal liberty, of freedom from assigned collective identities, and of freedom to craft one's own path from the raw materials of birth, context and social stereotypes. But that potential has now become a big part of the mineable self of our digital era.

The intelligence of the artificial competes with previously human monopolies over affect, judgement and intuition. The classical individual is now an unstable composite of credit scores, actuarial charts, algorithmic storehouses, and consumer profiles, with virtually no need for a unified or continuous anchor in a singular person. Thus, what the philosopher Charles Taylor studied as "The Sources of the Self" might today be retold as the story of the "sources of the selfie".
