Category: Editorial
Title: The universalisation of AI Part One

The universalisation of AI

The India AI Impact Summit, held from February 16-21, 2026, attracted considerable attention not only within the nation but also internationally. It has inspired numerous young people, entrepreneurs, multinationals and, expectedly, the doyens of the world of commerce and business. The event enhanced India's global reputation as a lead nation, not only in accepting and utilising new knowledge, but also in its resolve to play a leadership role in creating new knowledge.

It has adequate manpower imbued with scientific temper and dedicated to the 'search for Truth'! Top experts gathered for the event were busy envisioning the implications of rapidly expanding new horizons after the arrival of AI, and these deserve incisive 360 ° scrutiny. Clearly, AI and its allotropes would have a comprehensive impact on every aspect of human life.

The churning so generated has already begun to pose not only encouraging possibilities ahead but also the issues of considerable concern emerging before the learners, parents, societies and the nations. It has serious implications for international collaboration, which would become more demanding in the years ahead. On the sidelines, the Summit also witnessed how a 'Robot Dog' - purchased from the market, but displayed and claimed as conceptualised, tested and produced by a private deemed university emerged as an embarrassing aspect in an otherwise inspiring environment.

For anyone familiar with quality concerns, it would be agonising to wish it away as one of the glitches that creep into such major international gatherings. It would be imprudent on the part of the higher education system not to treat it as an eye-opener, particularly for all those entrusted with preparing the generations ahead in schools, colleges and universities. Unfortunately, this aspect did not receive the attention it deserved in the media, and learned articulations on it.

The Robot Dog has educated us on the decline in the moral and ethical fibre, and also the need to scrutinise the scenario in terms of quality and excellence in education, and particularly higher education. According to a tentative estimate, India has around 1.1 -1.2 billion mobile phones, and almost the same number of literate people, estimating roughly at a literacy rate of 80%. The universalisation of education is yet a distant dream, but the rise of the mobiles from around a mere one million only in 2001-02 to their universalisation indicates the pace of change that is the major characteristic of the 21st century.

The mobile phone has successfully integrated itself as a necessary component of every individual's life. Consequently, the fascination now is no longer for the mobile phone, but for AI, chatbots, new gadgets, and much more! Just recall how the mere availability of a mobile phone and Wi-Fi transformed the entire learning scenario, the social scenario, and much more!

As the mobile phone made its presence felt, children got glued to it! Serious concerns were expressed on various counts by concerned parents on how damaging its impact would be on their studies -- and more than that, on their growing up. COVID-19 changed it all just upside-down! Online teaching became a great support to ensure the continuity of the process of education and studies in tough times.

Parental attitudes changed drastically! Scolding and frowning over too much time being spent with the mobile phone was replaced by coaxing children to spend more time on mobile studies! One had personally observed how society took it upon itself to come forward and to assist the children who needed the gadget support.
