Category: Editorial
Title: TN pension scheme balanced but will pressure

TN pension scheme balanced, but will pressure finances

The State should be diligent about its monthly transfers to the pension fund, as any ambiguity in this regard can cause a gap in funds needed for pension payouts The Tamil Nadu Assured Pension Scheme (TAPS), to be implemented in 2027, bears the trappings of an election promise, with State polls round the corner - but its design is not without merits. TAPS, in fact, largely follows the Unified Pension Scheme (UPS) model, offered to Central government employees from this fiscal year. Like the UPS, it promises a defined pension to State government employees and teachers.

From the employees' point of view this is far better than the current Consolidated Pension Scheme (CPS) in the State, where the employee and the government contribute 10 per cent of the salary, but the employee does not have any assured pension and is paid only the accumulated sum along with interest on retirement. From a public finance viewpoint, TAPS looks better than the old pension scheme that is being implemented by some non-BJP ruled States. Under the latter, the entire pension burden falls on the State government.

In TAPS, 50 per cent of the last drawn basic pay and dearness allowance is promised as assured pension. The employee's contribution is maintained at 10 per cent under TAPS, but the State government's contribution is increased to 18.5 per cent. There is also a small lumpsum payment which will be borne entirely by the government.

The pension will also be adjusted for inflation regularly and 60 per cent of the pension will be paid to the nominee on death of the employee. The decision to shift the pension corpus to Pension Fund Regulatory Development Authority from LIC is also a good move as the corpus can increase faster if managed judiciously, reducing the burden on the State government. About six lakh employees stand to gain from TAPS.

TAPS needs to be implemented carefully to ensure that the pension corpus does not fall short of requirement. Under UPS, the Central government's contribution of 18.5 per cent of the salary is split into two parts  -  10 per cent of the salary is added to the employee's pension account and 8.5 per cent is moved into a common pool which is used to address any shortfall in meeting the pension obligation. The Tamil Nadu government has not specified how its contribution of 18.5 per cent of the salary under TAPS will be accounted for.

The State should be diligent about its monthly transfers to the pension fund, as any ambiguity in this regard can cause a gap in funds needed for pension payouts. TAPS is, however, likely to increase the State's pension payout by at least 20 per cent over the existing level of ₹42,000 crore. The higher outlay should be viewed in the backdrop of the fact that the State's committed expenditures towards interest payments, salaries and pension account for well over half its revenue receipts.

Given the state of Tamil Nadu's finances and the large workforce, the timing of the rollout of TAPS appears inopportune; it could have been postponed to the future. In the interim, the CPS corpus could have been transferred to PFRDA to help it earn better returns for pensioners.
