Category: Editorial
Title: To protect farmers and their produce Indias Part Two

To protect farmers and their produce, India's GI tag needs reform

This means 58 per cent of GI tags exist only on paper, with no individual producers legally authorised to use them. Studies conducted by TERI reveal that a GI-tagged product commands a 20-30 per cent premium. However, farmers of Malabar pepper and Vazhakulam pineapple saw no increase in income post-registration.

Around 80 per cent of Indian farmers fall prey to intermediaries, trading hubs, and exporters. As a result, only 10-15 per cent of the actual premium trickled down to actual producers. By comparison, in the European system, the actual producers easily receive 50-60 per cent of the premium. Indian farmers receive less than a third of the economic reward achieved by their Western counterparts.

The Path to Reform The system needs to be corrected by taking into account the European Union's state-led administrative model. India must transition towards a state-led enforcement mechanism in which the underfunded producers are not made to police markets for infringement under Section 25 of the GI Act. Such reforms include establishing GI Enforcement Cells within state agricultural departments, and installing an Online GI Monitoring Cell utilising domain-name alerts and geo-blocking to combat online counterfeiting.

Structurally, the state should back collective producer groups to promote collective bargaining power, and extend the benefit-sharing system between the marketing bodies and the actual tilling farmers, backed by centralised promotional funding to prevent premium drain. Essentially, the Delhi High Court in the Pisco Dispute (Chile vs. Peru) stated that it is not a race for commercial "prior use".

Therefore, homonymous GIs can harmoniously coexist through regional prefixing. This will remedy a common GI challenge. India must reform its GI framework to ensure it protects the soil and the hands that till it. Or Rajasthan's cumin farmers will not be the last to lose their heritage to a hollow shield.

By Anubhav Chaudhary The writer is a lawyer
