Category: Editorial
Title: Top courts green governance cause for Part Two

Top court's green governance, cause for uncertainty

The Court has used expert inputs to compensate for its limits but has also contested expertise. This push-pull relationship, while implicitly not a bad thing, has also set the stage for U-turns. Perhaps where the Court conducting itself as an approving authority has bitten the hardest is the consequences for public challenge.

As environmental lawyer Ritwick Dutta has argued, project proponents and governments have been forced to approach the Court for permissions even before statutory authorities have finished examining a project, at the same time conferring a sense of finality that discourages contestation later. The bigger problem here is not that the Court may get a technical detail wrong but that its early entry into the approval process can smother meaningful judicial review in other fora. As a result, when the Court modifies an older rule, it also reshapes who is heard and on what evidentiary basis.

Need for stability Many of these disputes also sit inside continuing mandamus structures  -  serial interim directions, committee reports, affidavits, and modifications  -  so it has been easy for the Court to correct course but often at the expense of stability. Instead, the Court should consider adopting a steadier hand, i.e., protecting the environment by disciplining the state back into regulation. It can do this by specifying thresholds for when it will issue managerial directions and insisting on time-bound regulatory action with reasons and public data, while retaining its prerogative to review legality and procedures.

It can also reduce uncertainty by avoiding sweeping rules that also immediately invite exceptions and by explaining in advance what kinds of evidence or implementation constraints would justify modification. This way, regulated actors will deal with strict rather than negotiable rules, governments will not have to contend with parallel decision-making, and the people will know where and how to contest activities that render environmental harm. By Vasudevan Mukunth
