Category: Editorial
Title: Transmission delays slow green push Part Two

Transmission delays slow green push

A scheme to evacuate 8.1 Gw of solar power from Rajasthan, with parts scheduled for completion as far back as 2022, is still not fully operational. Similar holdups are seen in major projects in Khavda (Gujarat) and Anantapur (Andhra Pradesh). When one company bears too much of the burden, delays in one project inevitably cascade, holding up multiple renewable energy zones at once.

So, what is the way forward? First, we must consciously decentralise the development of our transmission infrastructure. The regulatory framework should actively encourage more players. This would also be in consonance with competition. A practical step would be to introduce market share limitations, similar to the successful model used in solar power auctions, where a single bidder cannot be allocated more than 50% of the offered capacity.

This would preserve competitive intensity and build execution resilience without undermining PGCIL capabilities. Second, we must tackle the biggest on-ground hurdle - securing right-of-way and statutory clearances. The government should institute a dedicated single-window clearance mechanism for interstate transmission projects.

By having a central authority to handle land and environmental clearances, we can shift this non-core execution risk away from individual bidders and into a more efficient, stable institutional framework. India's renewable energy dream is too important to be left stranded. We have successfully created a competitive and vibrant market for generating clean power.

It is now time to apply the same innovative thinking to building the highways that will carry it. A robust, timely, and modern transmission grid is the backbone of our energy future. To build it, we need more than one strong back - we need a concerted, collective effort. By Dhanendra Kumar The writer is former Chairman, Competition Commission of India, and Chairman, Competition Advisory Services India LLP (COMPAD)
