Category: Editorial
Title: Understanding inequality in Indias growth Part Two

Understanding inequality in India's growth story

In short, the urban sector, which is more affluent, is more unequal than its rural counterparts. Inequality dynamics in India First, it is almost unanimously agreed upon that the superrich segment of the Indian population is hardly captured by the NSS surveys (consumption or wealth); thus any inequality estimation based on the same is a gross underestimation. Our own calculation based on this data suggests that about one fourth of even the richest 10% in India benefited from the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY) and about 13% of them have access to Below Poverty Line (BPL) ration cards.

Second, for a nuanced understanding of inequality dynamics in India, one must go beyond inter-personal or solely income/spending groups-based (for example, decile; percentile) inequality calculations and analyse disparity along various socio-economic axes such as caste and class. Deploying an alternative class-based analysis alongside a closer examination of the growth process and policy changes since Independence, Vamsi Vakulabharanam of the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, in his book, Class and Inequality in China and India, 1950-2010, shows that since the 1980s (even before the 1991 reforms), urban owners, managers, and professionals have gained disproportionately, contributing to India's consumption boom. In contrast, urban informal workers, rural small farmers, and agricultural labourers have lagged markedly behind.

All these added to increasing between-class inequality vis-à-vis within-class inequality in India's evolving urban landscape. Over the last decade or so, there has not been any systemic change despite various welfare measures, to counter or reverse such trend in class-based inequality. Typical explorations of inequality often overlook this growth-class-inequality nexus.

Moreover, a large share of Indians remains engaged in debt-led consumption. The complexities involved in the issue of inequality in India warn us that policies formulated on the presupposition of lower disparity could be misleading and may produce adverse, albeit unintended, welfare implications. By Saswata Guha Thakurata, Chaitanya Talreja Writers are Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, FLAME University, Pune and Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, Shiv Nadar University Chennai, respectively.
