Category: Editorial
Title: Union Budget and beyond Part Two

Union Budget and beyond

In this context, the tax breaks for investment in AI data centres seem to be questionable when many companies are ploughing ahead without such incentives while not bearing any of the environmental and social costs of their rush to dominate the AI space. Perhaps such policy changes are motivated by political lobbying - a feature of any country's public expenditure choices. India's government also remains somewhat prone to favouring policies with too much built-in bureaucratic discretion, despite some progress on this front.

Budget needs deeper analysis The details of the Budget require more lengthy analysis, which others have offered. One thing that such analyses sometimes miss is that seemingly large sums are often not significant - a Rs 10,000-crore outlay is less than 0.02% of central government expenditure. Analysts are better, though, at pointing out inconsistencies and coordination gaps in the Budget, which, perhaps unavoidably, has the flavour of a laundry list rather than a strategic document.

But that may be unfair - strategic documents should be prior to any Budget. In this respect, the Economic Survey has provided some of that intellectual foundation. This year's Survey is a long and ambitious document, highlighting ideas such as resilience and the importance of an entrepreneurial state.

The latter is meant to address the problem of limited state capacity and draws on East Asian examples. The concluding two-part chapter of the Survey may be the best indication of how government policymakers and advisors envisage India's economic trajectory. The Budget and the FC report are broadly aligned with the tone of these chapters.

To some extent, what is envisaged is a transformation of governance and society that will put India on a path to advanced country status. There is a large dose of pride in India's past as a model for its future. All of this deserves careful analysis. An economist might caution that rhetoric translates into reality only when resources and incentives are aligned with goals.

From that perspective, it is still unclear if India's economic policies through the Budget and beyond are doing enough to build human and social capital in ways that will accelerate or even sustain economic growth. Written by Anamika Sinha The author is Professor of Economics, University of California, Santa Cruz.
