Category: Editorial
Title: US and Israel dont get Iran Their prospects Part One

US and Israel don't get Iran. Their prospects of a military victory are weak

Ran. Their prospects of a military victory are weak Despite a serious degradation of Iran's air force, missile defence, navy and defence production since the start of the war, Iran has been able to threaten Israeli, US and Gulf military, oil and other targets in the region with its seemingly deep and dispersed store of missiles and drones Five weeks into an unprovoked and unjustified Israel-US war on Iran that started with the unprecedented "decapitation" of the top Iranian political and military leadership and a massive attack on its military and civil infrastructure, the US-led war seems to be faltering. Extraordinarily, the collective assassination of Iran's leadership in violation of all laws, domestic or international, took place while the US and Iran were holding negotiations mediated by Oman on Iran's nuclear programme, the ostensible casus belli.

It shatters basic assumptions of diplomatic immunity and negotiations, leaving little room for good faith and diplomacy to end the war. Despite a serious degradation of Iran's air force, missile defence, navy and defence production since the start of the war, Iran has been able to threaten Israeli, US and Gulf military, oil and other targets in the region with its seemingly deep and dispersed store of missiles and drones. It has leveraged its geography and control of the Strait of Hormuz to rattle Western capitals and markets.

An estimated 3,000 ships with 20,000 sailors, many of them Indians, are reportedly anchored in and around the strait, facing food and water shortages and psychological stress. This is a potential humanitarian challenge for which the international community is ill-prepared. Despite the theocratic Iranian regime's harsh suppression of human rights and internal reform, attempts at internal and externally sponsored regime change and fomenting ethnic conflict, inciting the Kurds and the Baloch, have not gained momentum.

Fears of a sectarian Shia-Sunni conflict have not been borne out, with Sunnis largely backing Iran's defiance of the US and Israel. Iran is now daring the US to launch a ground invasion, projecting confidence in its ability to withstand it. An air operation on April 4 resulted in an embarrassing downing of F-15s and other sophisticated US aircraft.

This does not augur well for ground operations. The US is, simultaneously, threatening a ground invasion of Iran and naval operations as well as demanding that the Strait of Hormuz be opened. It's also demanding that its Western allies join the war, or it might pull out of NATO. It has threatened to walk out of the war, leaving allies to deal with their interests and consequences on their own.

It is not clear if Washington fully grasps the risks and implications of these actions. President Donald Trump's March 31 threat to bomb Iran back to "the stone ages" is an implicit acknowledgement of the failure of the initial goal of regime change. Meanwhile, as Israel expands the conflict once again into Lebanon  -  establishing a security zone, ethnically cleansing Lebanon south of the Litani river and bombing historic cities like Tyre and Beirut (including residential areas)  -  more Western "allies" are breaking ranks with the US and Israel over the war.
