Category: Editorial
Title: Venezuela after Maduro What Washington Part One

Venezuela after Maduro: What Washington really wants

Venezuelans would hope that Washington's meddling does not lead to yet more uncertainty and societal chaos In all the noise emanating from Washington regarding its military operation to oust Venezuelan leader Nicolás Maduro, it's important to separate fact from fiction. First, there is no regime change in Venezuela. At least, not yet.

The United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV) remains in charge. The party's high command continues to parrot their usual rhetoric and has called the US operation a "terrorist" attack to "kidnap" Maduro, in complete breach of international law. The four main ringleaders retain their positions: Vice President Delcy Rodríguez (recently sworn in as interim president), her brother Jorge Rodríguez, who presides over the National Assembly, four-star general Vladimir Padrino López, who leads the defence ministry, and Diosdado Cabello, the interior minister.

While Padrino López and Cabello are hardline Chavistas, followers and supporters of the socialist ideology espoused by late Venezuelan socialist Hugo Chávez, the Rodriguez siblings may be considered more moderate Chavistas. If Washington really wanted to enact regime change, they would not have left such important figures of the regime untouched, safe and sound in Venezuela. It seems increasingly plausible that Washington accepted a modified version of a proposal presented by Qatari mediators, which included Delcy Rodríguez serving as leader of a transitional government.

The Qatari intermediaries presented this as "Madurismo without Maduro," which could "enable a peaceful transition in Venezuela  -  preserving political stability without dismantling the ruling apparatus." So, if regime change was not Washington's objective, what is? That brings us to the second point: Oil. It is now popular knowledge that Venezuela is home to the world's largest reserves of oil, with 303 billion barrels of oil, eclipsing even Saudi Arabia.

For years, the large majority of Venezuela's crude oil exports were destined for refineries in the United States. Throughout Chávez's time in power, more than 50 per cent of Venezuela's oil exports went to the US, and even during Maduro's reign from 2013 to 2025, between 35-50 per cent of Venezuela's oil was shipped to US shores  -  at this time, countries like China and India also began importing large quantities of Venezuelan oil. As Trump recently noted in a press conference, Washington is certainly interested in Venezuela's oil, claiming that US oil companies will spend billions of dollars to "fix the badly broken infrastructure and start making money for the country." This is a tall claim and is unlikely to materialise during Trump's time in office.

While Chevron already accounts for a quarter of Venezuela's total oil production, it may take years for US oil majors like ExxonMobil and ConocoPhillips to return to Venezuela and restart production at scale, and it would cost them billions to do so in a country with an uncertain political future. Venezuela may need to invest as much as $100 billion to ramp up production from the current level of around 900,000 barrels per day (bpd) to 2 million bpd. Third, the entire exercise conducted by Washington, in conjunction with the Pentagon and Langley, home of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), became a major show of force of the US's military and covert capabilities, and their readiness to conduct military operations on foreign soil.
