Category: Editorial
Title: Venezuela after Maduro What Washington Part Two

Venezuela after Maduro: What Washington really wants

The photos posted by Trump on social media, sitting beside the CIA chief, flanked by the US Secretary of War Pete Hegseth and several military leaders, all executing an operation on foreign soil while sitting in the US, are meant to send a message not only to Caracas, but to the world at large. That message was echoed by Hegseth in a recent press conference: "Welcome to 2026, and under President Trump, America is back." As many world leaders and even US senators have noted, the US operation on Venezuelan oil is certainly a violation of international law. This sets a dangerous example, one that other autocratic leaders from China and Russia may use to justify similar future actions in what they consider to be their neighbourhood.

The situation in far-off Venezuela may seem irrelevant to most Indian observers, but New Delhi will keep a close track of developments. As expected, India's public statement on the situation is prudent, only noting that this is a "matter of deep concern," focusing on the "well-being and safety of the people of Venezuela." India has never been a close political ally of the Chavista government in Venezuela, but it is nonetheless an economic partner to the country's oil industry. If US oil firms reinsert themselves in Venezuela's oil industry, it may not leave much space for Indian oil importers like Reliance Industries and Nayara Energy, nor for investors like ONGC Videsh, Indian Oil and Oil India, which already have a stake in multiple oilfields in Venezuela.

The road ahead for Venezuela remains unclear, but one thing is certain: The Venezuelan people will continue to battle poverty, violence, hyperinflation and are far from receiving even the basic necessities of healthcare, education, security and infrastructure. Chavismo has wrecked Venezuelan society for more than a decade, led by corrupt officials, the absence of a rule of law, co-opted institutions and constant political repression. Even the Venezuelan opposition remains divided and is unable to take advantage of the current situation.

Venezuelans would hope that Washington's meddling does not lead to yet more uncertainty and societal chaos. Democracy seems like a tall order now, but the best-case scenario remains a call for new elections and a transition to a leader who could even get a semblance of legitimacy. By Hari Seshasayee The writer is cofounder of Consilium Group and visiting fellow at the Observer Research Foundation (ORF)
