Category: Editorial
Title: What international law says about the Part Two

What international law says about the Israeli strikes on Iranian oil facilities

This includes the impact of service interruptions, economic disruption, fuel shortages and, perhaps most importantly, reduced air, water and soil quality. Environmental contamination, particularly degraded water quality, has been documented following attacks on energy facilities in previous conflicts. The most notable instances have been in Kuwait during the 1991 Gulf war, Syria in 2015 and Ukraine since 2022.

Under international humanitarian law, adversaries must take these considerations into account when assessing what is proportionate in the pursuit of military objectives. They must weigh the anticipated military advantage against the broader consequences for civilians who depend on the targeted facilities. Tehran's high energy demands mean that damage to refineries that supply fuel to millions could cause severe disruption.

It could also cause air and water pollution. The Iranian authorities warned of toxic acid rain immediately after the attacks on Tehran's oil facilities, and many residents have since reported headaches and difficulty breathing. These consequences do not appear to have been considered in the Israeli military's proportionality assessment.

No feasible precautions or mitigation measures were reported prior to the attacks. There also does not appear to be evidence that attacking the refineries would yield a definite military advantage. International humanitarian law does not categorically prohibit attacks on energy infrastructure. But it does require careful, context-specific assessments of the military relevance of an energy facility and the possible civilian harm caused by its destruction.

For now, assessing the legality of the Israeli strikes is difficult. More detail on the role of the refineries in Iran's military operations and the anticipated military advantage achieved by targeting them will be required before a judgment can be made. Saeed Bagheri, Assistant Professor of International Law, University of Reading
