Category: Editorial
Title: What do you fall back on when income fails Part One

'What do you fall back on when income fails': food insecurity, migration and COVID-19

What do you fall back on when income fails': food insecurity, migration and COVID-19 Policies like the Public Distribution System can be further strengthened by accounting for contextual vulnerabilities to ensure that short-term coping during crisis does not risk exacerbating inequalities in the longer term "…his condition was so bad, he was ill, and he was not taken to the hospital (he passed away) … I used to sell snacks all day… and throughout the day, I used to think I should collect enough money before I go home and bring painkillers to my father… feed him fruits etc. so that he becomes well as before…My father was very good. He never let me feel any dearth of anything… like shade from the sun.

We heard many such stories from families we interviewed between December 2022 and March 2023 about their experiences during COVID-19. What stood out was the fact that the pandemic did not create these vulnerabilities. It exposed them and sometimes exacerbated them - often with no solutions in sight and disastrous consequences.

Who or what can you fall back upon when life, as you know it, comes to screeching halt? We found this was the most critical question for vulnerable families who struggle to make ends meet in 'normal times'. The answer often determines whether the household's choices stayed temporary and reversible, or whether they were forced to take actions that would have lasting consequences for their wellbeing - that is, whether coping strategies became 'erosive'.

Reversible vs. erosive choices Our study focussed on food insecurity, which refers to difficulties accessing enough food to support a healthy life. We examined how food related choices were made during the lockdown period. When livelihoods were disrupted, the families we interviewed first tried to manage with food compromises like reducing portion sizes and cutting back on more expensive foods like milk, meat, and eggs.

But lockdowns continued, savings eroded and incomes became more uncertain. Families were then forced to make increasingly difficult choices, including taking loans for food, delaying medical expenditures, and temporarily withdrawing children from school. While some strategies are routine, especially in households relying on informal livelihoods, some more drastic steps were mandated by disruptions caused by COVID-19.

These included women surviving on a bare minimum and skipping meals so that children could be fed and men could continue searching for jobs; sending children away to live with relatives temporarily while the adults tried to find alternate employment; and, for migrant workers, returning to their hometowns. Reverse migration and shared rural-urban vulnerabilities Some migrant workers tried to move back to their hometowns assuming food would not be a problem there. You might recall vivid images of this migration from urban to rural areas during COVID-19, as covered by popular media, including the movie Homebound - India's official entry to the Oscars.

Our study, conducted in parts of Uttar Pradesh and Goa, found that this reverse migration exposed the existing vulnerabilities of both rural and urban economies. Due to the limited jobs available in rural areas, migration to nearby urban areas has become a sustenance strategy, and multi-sited households have become increasingly common. However, while people living in an area for a longer time establish local social networks (and can draw on them in times of need), we found that this support was rarely available to migrant workers - especially the recent circular migrants.
