Category: Editorial
Title: What Indians eat and how being unhealthy is Part Two

What Indians eat, and how being unhealthy is easier and cheaper

India may be becoming wealthier, but not necessarily healthier. The World Obesity Atlas 2025 shows that currently, one in eight people globally lives with obesity. Studies have shown direct linkages between obesity and malnourishment, with the consumption of high-fat, salty and sugary foods. Mapping the HCES consumption quantities to healthy diet recommendations by the National Institute of Nutrition (NIN) reveals that energy requirement from cereals in terms of grams per day is adequately met across all deciles and sectors, but there is a significant gap in the consumption of vegetables and pulses.

While vegetable consumption does increase with income, there remains a gap against the target of 400 grams per day. On average, the protein intake falls short by around 20 per cent (14g/day) against the recommended 70g/day, with the deficit ranging from ~26g/day in the poorest decile to around 5g/day in the richest. Global conversations on sustainable diets also revolve around shifting away from animal-sourced foods to plant-based ones to reduce the environmental impact of food production.

Following NIN's dietary guidelines could reduce methane emissions by 36 per cent and nitrous oxide by 35 per cent by 2050, while simultaneously cutting food prices by up to 24 per cent and household food expenditures by 23 per cent. Yet, bridging the gap between evidence and action requires confronting hard truths. The root of this crisis lies not merely in what Indians eat, but in the ecosystem that makes unhealthy choices easier and cheaper.

Shifting consumption patterns demand bold, coordinated interventions across multiple fronts. Fiscal measures like strategic taxation on ultra-processed foods and sugary beverages must work in tandem with front-of-package labelling (FOPL) that empowers consumers to make informed choices. But regulation alone cannot succeed without transforming the supply side.

Small-scale farmers need targeted support, training, resources, and market linkages to cultivate nutrient-dense foods at competitive prices. Subsidies for harmful fertilisers and pesticides must be repurposed to reward farmers for growing nutritionally dense crops, using regenerative agricultural techniques. Equally critical is investment in both R&D and scaling of low glycemic, high-protein rice, higher-yielding millet, pulse varieties and expansion of cold storage and processing facilities for fruits and vegetables in rural areas.

Underutilised sources of protein (especially from aquatic and marine sources) must be explored and made available. Food companies must invest in affordable, culturally appropriate, healthy products matching Indian tastes and lifestyles. It requires a whole-of-society engagement, including the government, industry, farmers, research agencies, and citizens working together to redesign a food system where the healthy choice becomes the easy choice.

By Soumya Swaminathan, Vartika Singh & Sowmiyaa Subramaniam Swaminathan is chairperson, M S Swaminathan Research Foundation and former chief scientist, WHO. Singh is senior research analyst, IFPRI. Subramaniam is research scholar at Centre for Management in Agriculture at IIM, Ahmedabad
