Category: Editorial
Title: What do you fall back on when income fails Part Two

'What do you fall back on when income fails': food insecurity, migration and COVID-19

Additionally, these social networks are often embedded in hierarchies of caste and class, providing access to some while denying it for others. Migrant workers also could not access government support, something that proved a crucial fall-back option for vulnerable families when livelihoods were disrupted. This was not because government support was inadequate.

Indeed, many families relied nearly exclusively on government support during the difficult time of lockdowns. However, access to these support schemes remained a challenge for migrant workers as they lacked local registrations. Reverse migration put an additional strain on struggling rural economies too.

In one instance, the landowner pulled out of a crop sharing arrangement (batai) once his sons returned home and could work the family's land themselves, leaving landless labourers without work and without their share of grain payments which they rely on throughout the year. This shortfall came at a time that they needed work and income the most. Public Distribution System, the backbone for India's food coping During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Indian government expanded support under the Public Distribution System (PDS) - a key food security scheme providing subsidised cereals and other staples to eligible households.

Cereal allocations were doubled, and additional items such as oil and chickpeas were introduced in some areas to promote dietary diversity. Complementary schemes were also launched to address heightened food insecurity amid livelihood disruptions. For many households, this proved to be a critical lifeline.

Some families we spoke to described how they survived on just the PDS cereals (rice and wheat) with salt during the lockdowns. Some cultivating families had vegetables or lentils for self-consumption and sale but faced difficulties due to disruption in market access/ other restrictions. A multi-generational milk selling family discussed how they had to creatively use up various forms of milk, with limited cold-storage facilities and low local purchasing power and how a portion of it was regularly wasted.

However, without local registrations the migrant workers could not access any government support and often had to fall back on support from civil society groups, access informal loans, or return to rural areas. Preparing for disruptions Conflicts, disease outbreaks, and global interdependencies that disrupt global supply chains are becoming increasingly common. In this context, it is imperative that governments, communities, and households be better prepared for crisis events such as COVID-19.

In the current situation where migration has become a key livelihood strategy, it is essential for governments to better support mobile populations. In this context, while social protection schemes like the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC), which allow migrants to access their PDS allocations from anywhere in the country, offer a vital policy intervention, our findings suggest a lack of policy awareness and implementation gaps in the transition process. Given that many households were multi-sited, with members residing in multiple jurisdictions, enabling decentralised access to rations based on an individual's place of residence rather than a single registered household location would better reflect the lived realities of mobile and multi-sited households and individuals.

Public policies like the PDS form the backbone of household's resilience strategies. Such policies are tremendously helpful and important for vulnerable families. Our findings suggest they can be further strengthened by accounting for contextual vulnerabilities to ensure that short-term coping during crisis does not risk exacerbating inequalities in the longer term.
