Category: Editorial
Title: Why youre paying for flights you never took Part One

Why you're paying for flights you never took

In today's Finshots, we talk about the government's ₹10,000 crore ATF (Aviation Turbine Fuel) Price Stabilisation Fund aimed at protecting aviation and passengers, but one that may still end up costing you indirectly. The Story Fuel prices as you know are wreaking havoc globally as the West Asia crisis has pushed crude oil prices higher. And India, which depends heavily on crude imports for its fuel and energy needs, isn't immune.

That's why the government has had little choice but to let fuel and LPG refill prices rise for people like you and me. But there's one place where this pain is hitting even harder. We're talking about aviation. For context, over the past few weeks, India's two dominant airlines  -  Indigo and Air India, which together control over 90% of the domestic market, have quietly been doing three things: They've been hiking fares through fuel surcharges just to stay afloat.

They've temporarily suspended flights on certain routes. Some airlines have even put non-technical employees on unpaid leave to cut costs. And that's because fuel makes up anywhere between 25 - 40% of an airline's operating costs. But with jet fuel prices nearly 2.5 times higher at around ₹142 per litre in just the last three months, fuel alone could now account for nearly 60% of operating expenses for Indian airlines.

That's a problem as airlines can only absorb so much pain. Raise fares too much, and passengers may stop flying. Cut too many routes, and revenues take a hit. Slash too many jobs, and well, that comes with its own consequences. So now, the government seems to have a ₹10,000 crore plan up its sleeve. It's called the ATF (Aviation Turbine Fuel) Price Stabilisation Fund.

What's that, you ask? Well, we'll get to that in a bit, but first, some quick context. Most Indian airlines buy jet fuel or ATF from oil marketing companies (OMCs) like Indian Oil, BPCL, and HPCL. And since fuel prices are deregulated in India, OMCs can raise prices when global crude prices climb. Which means airlines end up bearing the pain of costlier fuel and, eventually, passengers like you and me pay for it through higher ticket prices.

But there's a small nuance here. Even though OMCs have hiked ATF prices, they still aren't selling fuel at levels that make them a profit or even help them break even for that matter. In fact, they've been selling ATF at a loss, with under-recoveries of nearly ₹30 per litre. So now you have a two-sided problem.

Airlines are struggling with soaring fuel costs, while OMCs are bleeding money. That's where the government's ₹10,000 crore ATF Price Stabilisation Fund comes in. In simple terms, it's a one-time, interest-free loan to OMCs, so that they don't have to fully pass on soaring fuel costs to airlines. In return, OMCs will supply jet fuel to airlines at fixed prices (of ₹86 per litre for domestic flights and ₹104 per litre for international operations) even if actual market prices are much higher.

So instead of airlines buying fuel at today's elevated prices, they get access to cheaper ATF for a while. That gives airlines some breathing room and reduces the pressure to sharply hike ticket prices or cut routes. But this doesn't mean that the government is simply handing over ₹10,000 crore upfront.
