Category: Editorial
Title: Why havent tariffs crashed the US economy Part One

Why haven't tariffs crashed the US economy?

Delays in data collection, Trump's discrepancy in following through with his threats, and uncertainty among importers make tariff shocks not fully visible When US President Donald Trump took office last January, most economists feared what would happen if he raised tariffs. The expectation was that as the new duties drove up prices of consumer goods and inputs, surging inflation and falling real incomes would follow.

This would be a supply shock, so the US Federal Reserve could not do much to counteract it. Trump did raise tariffs to shocking levels, violating international agreements and blowing up the Republican Party's oft-professed commitment to free trade. In terms of severity and disruptiveness, Trump's 2025 tariffs went far beyond the already-harmful tariffs of his first term, and even beyond the infamous Smoot-Hawley Act of 1930.

According to the Yale Budget Lab, the average effective tariff on US imports rose from 2% to 18%, the highest level since the 1930s, this year. Add to that the uncertainty caused by frequent and inexplicable policy changes, and large adverse effects on inflation, employment, and real incomes appeared all but inevitable. But things did not turn out as anticipated.

It is possible that consumer price inflation (CPI) did not rise at all: the most recently reported rate, for the 12 months ending in November, is 2.7%  -  the same level as in the closing months of 2024. (Of course, the price level is higher, contrary to Trump's claims.) Economic growth probably slowed toward the end of the year, but the situation remains unclear, because a US government shutdown delayed data collection. In any case, it is pretty safe to say that the economic damage caused during Trump's first year back in office has been smaller than predicted.

There are four reasons why his tariffs' biggest effects were limited or delayed in 2025. First, US economic statistics are unusually vulnerable to measurement problems, owing to the government shutdown, which stretched from October 1 to November 12. Some CPI information is missing because the Bureau of Labor Statistics could not collect data as usual.

Even in November, there is reason to doubt that housing cost inflation amounted to zero, as reported. If true, this would bias the overall CPI estimate downwards. The second reason we have seen less damage from Trump's tariffs than expected is that many of the highest ones are not fully in effect. Trump has postponed some tariffs repeatedly.

He rolled back others on November 14, because they were driving up grocery prices. Moreover, Trump introduced major tariff exceptions for some countries. For example, the integrated North American auto industry would have been devastated if he hadn't decided on March 6 to exempt goods from Mexico and Canada from the 25% levy that had gone into effect two days earlier.

Goods from these countries now face no penalty if they are imported under the US-Mexico-Canada Agreement. This softening was predictable. US business would have suffered enormously if Trump had fully implemented the tariffs he had announced, let alone threatened, so it was never likely that he would persist with the worst of them.

Trump regularly stakes out extreme negotiating positions, only to back down when the heat is on, even if he hasn't gotten what he demanded from the other side. In fact, investors' assumption that "Trump always chickens out"  -  known as TACO  -  has become a taunt. But when a madman threatens Armageddon, it is foolhardy to goad him into following through.
