Category: Editorial
Title: Why did the US Supreme Court reject Trumps Part Two

Why did the U.S. Supreme Court reject Trump's tariffs? | Explained

Section 301 of the U.S. Trade Act of 1974 allows tariffs to be imposed if the government finds that a trading partner has engaged in what it deems unfair trade practices. Section 232 is part of the U.S. Trade Expansion Act of 1962. These tariffs are levied on specific sectors if the Secretary of Commerce deems them necessary on national security grounds.

What role does Congress now play? Congress sits at the centre of tariff authority for two reasons. The Constitution assigns it the taxing power, and in its ruling, the court leaned heavily on this allocation while interpreting the IEEPA. Congress determines the scope of executive trade authority through statute.

It has the power to narrow existing delegations, require its approval for tariffs, or even expand presidential powers if it chooses to. Politically, redesigning tariff authority would require bipartisan agreement, especially since the court has made clear that sweeping tariffs must rest on a clear legislative footing. Will businesses that lost money to tariffs get refunds?

For months, American businesses and customers bore the brunt of the heightened tariffs. The court ruling, while rendering the tariffs illegal, has not created a mechanism for a refund. According to a Goldman Sachs report, $180 billion was collected through the now-invalidated tariffs. More than 1,000 companies, including big names like FedEx, have sued the U.S.

government in the U.S. Court of International Trade seeking refunds for the tariffs. The suit is seeking compensation for potentially millions of shippers who paid import duties and related fees on products that should have entered the U.S. duty-free, Reuters reported. Does the court decision limit future Presidents?

The ruling draws a clearer statutory boundary. Future Presidents will retain the authority to regulate trade, as Mr. Trump does, but courts rely heavily on precedents. As a result, it may scrutinise attempts to use emergency powers beyond their intended scope. By Areena Arora
