Category: Editorial
Title: Why havent tariffs crashed the US economy Part Two

Why haven't tariffs crashed the US economy?

The tariffs Trump has implemented are still very high. But this does not mean economists got their predictions all wrong. There are good reasons to think that many of the adverse effects of Trump's tariffs have simply been delayed. This brings us to the third point: As soon as Trump was elected in November 2024, companies began frontloading imports to accumulate stocks of goods before the anticipated tariffs were introduced.

After the tariffs came into effect, most retailers still didn't raise prices, as they had not depleted their pre-tariff inventories. This is common practice, though an economist might say that it violates the principle of profit maximisation. In fact  -  and this is the final and most important point  -  importers have continued to absorb much of the cost increase, even after depleting their pre-tariff inventories.

Using real-time data from large American retailers, Alberto Cavallo and his co-authors find that the prices of goods subject to the new tariffs have been rising since April. The increase, which amounted to about 5.4% at the retail level, has been enough to raise the inflation rate on the overall CPI basket by 0.7 percentage points above where it otherwise would have been. But it represents a small fraction of the costs that could potentially be passed through, at current tariff levels.

To be sure, the prices importers pay have risen proportionately with tariffs, contrary to Trump's claims that foreign exporters cover the costs of the duties by lowering their prices. It is US firms that have been absorbing the costs, much as they typically do when the dollar depreciates. This partly reflects the fact that they have no idea how long the tariffs will be in place.

This uncertainty also helps to explain why many affected firms have so far refrained from laying off workers. But firms will not let tariffs erode their profit margins indefinitely. Assuming the tariffs remain, the US can look forward to more price increases, and downward pressure on real incomes, in 2026.

By Jeffrey Frankel, Professor of capital formation & growth, Harvard University and research associate at the US National Bureau of Economic Research
