Category: Editorial
Title: Why India is silent on Russian oil Part One

Why India is silent on Russian oil

While finding it hard to deal with US pressure, India doesn't want to risk displeasing old ally Russia either. Commercially though, Russian oil is the most attractive for Indian refiners The last few days have seen geopolitical and energy experts working overtime trying to decipher the story of India and Russian oil purchase, and the US pressure. While the US maintains that New Delhi has committed to stop directly or indirectly importing Russian Federation oil, India has been stating that ensuring energy security for its 1.4 billion people is the core of its approach on sourcing petroleum products.

Opinions are divided on whether India will halt buying oil from Russia under US pressure. Critics say India is caught between the devil and the deep sea. New Delhi cannot let go of its relations with Russia nor can it be seen buckling under US pressure. Hence, this non-committal stance. However, it could also be pure commerce taking centre-stage in the energy space.

Non-committal stance As Alexandra Hermann, Lead Economist at Oxford Economics, explains: "India's non-committal stance reflects hard market realities rather than geo-politics. US oil is unlikely to replace Russian supplies because price-sensitive Indian refiners who are used to the handsome Russian discount won't likely be willing to pay above-market prices that US producers would need to raise output." "Crude grade mis-matches add another layer of constraint. While Venezuelan oil has been floated as an alternative, its export capacity of roughly 500,000 barrels a day is a fraction of the 1.5 million bpd India currently imports from Russia," Hermann said.

"A more realistic path would be halving Russian dependence and leaning more on Middle Eastern suppliers, but that also comes at a significant cost  -  Russian oil has been trading at discounts as wide as $10 per barrel recently, meaning India's oil import bill could rise by over $220 million a month," Hermann added. There is a point in these arguments. Yes, technically India can move away from Russian crude any day, but will it mean shift to American oil, is the question.

Indian refineries are complex and flexible enough to process alternative grades without major operational disruption. Says Sumit Ritolia, Lead Research Analyst, Refining and Modelling, at Kpler: "Technically, yes  -  India can move away from Russian crude any day. Prior to 2022, Russian barrels accounted for just 1-2 per cent of India's crude slate, with refiners largely dependent on the Middle East, Africa, the US, and Latin America." "However, while technically feasible, such a shift is politically and economically fraught.

Over the past few years, Russian crude has become embedded in a broader India-Russia energy partnership, underpinned by consistent price discounts that helped Indian refiners protect margins during periods of elevated global oil prices," he said. "Moreover, Russian grades  -  similar to Middle Eastern crude  -  are well suited to Indian refineries, offering strong middle-distillate yields, particularly diesel, which sits at the heart of India's demand barrel. This convergence of economics, refinery configuration, and geopolitics makes a clean break from Russian crude far more complex than the technical capability alone would imply," he said.

Then there is the issue of landed cost of Russian and US crude to India. "The landed cost of Russian crude into India has typically been materially lower than US barrels, primarily due to discounts on the headline price that often outweigh higher freight and insurance costs. Russian grades have at times traded at discounts of $5-10/bbl (and occasionally more).
