Category: Editorial
Title: Why India is silent on Russian oil Part Two

Why India is silent on Russian oil

Even after accounting for longer voyage time and logistics, Russian barrels have generally landed several dollars per barrel cheaper than US crude," he said. Will not halt completely According Vandana Hari, Founder and CEO of Vanda Insights, "I doubt India will completely halt Russian crude purchases. At a minimum, Nayara Energy's feedstock needs have to be met, and the company can only process Russian crude, being unable to buy from any other country since the EU sanctioned it last July." "But it's likely the PSUs may bring down their imports to zero, at least for the time being.

A reduction in Russian imports is not good news for Indian refiners as they are losing access to substantially discounted feedstock. But they can pivot to other suppliers  -  for spot cargoes or additional volumes under term contracts. surely can. Fortunately, flat prices are moderate and there is plenty of supply in the global market," she pointed out.

Clearly, geopolitics is the master performer here. Praveen Jha, Professor, Centre for Economic Studies and Planning at the School of Social Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, said: "Russia has been possibly one of the most important friends for decades now. A relationship that never goes against India's interest as it also sort of balances to some extent from China impact." On why India has not come out with a strong statement regarding purchase of oil from Russia, he said, "I guess it is not sure how to deal with this pressure from the US President Trump and it's old ties with Russia." Prerna Prabhakar, Fellow at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress (CSEP), said: "Data show that India's crude oil imports from Russia have declined since November 2025.

However, this decline has not been accompanied by a parallel increase in crude oil imports from the United States." "There are two important considerations with respect to the US crude oil supply. First, questions remain about whether the US has sufficient capacity to act as a large and sustained supplier, given that it is itself a net importer of crude oil. Second, Russian and US crude oils are not close substitutes because of differences in quality.

US crude is typically lighter, whereas Russian crude is heavier," she said. "To replicate the quality of Russian crude, India would need to blend US crude with other grades, which would entail additional costs. Either way, a shift away from Russian crude would have cost implications for India, which helps explain the government's cautious approach," she said.

As the debate continues, there is a possibility of a "pause" but not "halt". The US crude can remain attractive for diversification and quality reasons, but on pure economics, Russian oil has had a clear edge in recent years. By Richa Mishra
