Category: Editorial
Title: Will the BRICS push for dedollarisation Part One

Will the BRICS push for de-dollarisation inadvertently benefit China?

Within the bloc, China runs surpluses with most members, while India runs deficits with seven, except for Egypt, Ethiopia, and Iran As India prepares to host the 18th BRICS summit soon, the issue of de-dollarisation, that is, substituting the dollar as a currency of trade invoicing, payment settlement, and perhaps even as a reserve currency, has again gathered steam. China and Russia have strategic motivations to undercut American hegemony within the larger global financial order, and hence the pursuit of de-dollarisation has a strategic appeal to them.

Their struggles with holding dollar reserves and settling payments are widely documented, especially in the period since Russia invaded Ukraine. India isn't shielded from this form of vulnerability either. And nowhere is it more exposed than in the energy sector. India is a net importer of crude oil, meeting 88 per cent of its needs via imports, which further account for a fifth of India's total imports.

The fact that oil prices are pegged against the dollar renders India vulnerable, as any spike in oil prices, driven by recurrent instability in West Asia and prolonged sanctions on oil-producing nations, pushes the demand for the dollar, which can adversely impact the economy. The fact that the dollar is a hard currency also has bearing on the emerging markets. A minor adjustment in US monetary policy can trigger widespread flight of capital from the Indian equity market.

In another instance, Indian banks, wary of their heavy dollar exposure and the resulting sanctions risk, refused to process payments for Russian crude. For this reason, the idea of de-dollarisation resonates widely with many in India. The case for a local or BRICS currency Two solutions that have often been floated under the aegis of BRICS are replacing the dollar with either local currency trade or a common currency.

The idea entails that an alternative currency to settle trade will gradually and eventually lower the demand for dollars, thereby easing the pressure on the reserves the central banks must maintain and even spend to defend local currencies. It is also projected as a proof of concept that can be materialised in times of crisis. However, pursuing either of the two alternatives runs the risk of becoming a proxy for trade in renminbi.

Local currency trade works best in case of a balanced trade. The case of rupee-ruble trade is instructive. Because of a huge trade surplus vis-à-vis India, Russian banks accumulated rupee balances in special vostro accounts that Moscow could not spend or convert. Eventually, the two had to consider renminbi and dirham as third currencies to settle bilateral trade.

Recently, reports suggested that a functioning rupee-ruble mechanism has been established, but did not clarify how associated issues were resolved. Similarly, Russia-China local currency trade also serves as a warning. As their share of bilateral trade in local currencies expanded to almost 99 per cent, Russia has emerged as the largest holder of renminbi reserves.

Within BRICS, China runs surpluses with most members, while India runs deficits with seven except for Egypt, Ethiopia, and Iran. India's cumulative trade deficit with BRICS countries in FY26 stood at US$ 226 billion. In practice, local currency settlement across BRICS would therefore mean most members paying or owing China in renminbi.
