Category: Editorial
Title: Women farmers remain the missing link in Part Two

Women farmers remain the missing link in India's digital agriculture push

Digital literacy remains a critical barrier. Using the ability to access the internet for informational purposes as an indicator of digital literacy, the report notes that an overall 58.2 per cent women are unable to use the internet for information purposes while among Scheduled Castes women, this rises further to 63.4 per cent. Moreover, low proficiency in performing even basic ICT tasks such as sending messages, ability to make online transactions or reporting cyber fraud further deepen these barriers, especially given women's lower levels of formal education in rural settings.

This is not an isolated phenomenon but the outcome of decades of structural disenfranchisement, restrictive social norms, and institutional neglect that have historically constrained women's access to formal schooling and limited exposure of skill developing opportunities which is still nascent. As a result, the new wave of digital tools which are often complex and interface-heavy may be difficult for them to learn and to leverage efficiently. Nonetheless, to make them understand the tools and impart meaningful knowledge needs skillful training, extension services and capacity building programmes.

Yet only a limited share of such support is directed towards women farmers, even when training opportunities exist, training sessions are often held in locations that are either hard for women to access or their participation is often constrained by patriarchal gatekeeping. Many women farmers require household permission to attend sessions, face social resistance for attending public learning spaces and struggle to balance domestic responsibilities with participation in training programmes  -  factors that further restrict their mobility and reduce their exposure to emerging technologies. Field-level evidence and interviews reflect this situation.

A majority of women farmers expressed strong feelings of alienation and discomfort while engaging with the digital platforms. Furthermore, many also reported the sense of distance and mistrust due to the platforms' lack of alignment with women-centric needs, priorities and grievances. Specific case studies like DeHaat, an agri-tech start-up  -  less than 20 per cent women farmers were found to be utilising its advisory and insurance services and even women participation in meetings and platform-related conversations remained limited  -  clearly highlighting persistent gaps, where digital technologies not only failing to reach women farmers but also failing to earn their trust and engagement.

While the promise of technology is real and does hold transformative potential, and the existing limitation may not lie in "digitalisation" per se, but in the techno-optimist imagination. If the techno-optimist vision of digitalising agriculture  -  framed through the rhetoric of efficiency, deep technologies, innovation, scale and data-driven agri-value chains optimisation  -  it often remains detached from the ground realities of Indian agriculture, especially the socio-cultural conditions of women farmers. Indian agriculture is not merely an economic space where productivity can be technologically engineered.

It is a heterogenous social system intricately connected with gender, caste, patriarchy and entrenched power relations. Without accounting for these structural and socio-cultural preconditions, digital agriculture will be insufficient to transform rural livelihoods in real terms. Instead, it risks reproducing the existing inequalities in a new form.
