Category: Editorial
Title: A bold step amid an ambitious nuclear energy Part Two

A bold step amid an ambitious nuclear energy target

Realising this imperative, the units of the Department of Atomic Energy, in cooperation with Indian industry, have been working to harness nuclear energy in a manner so that the complete supply chain is indigenous. It is only uranium that has to be imported as India does not have enough uranium. India has developed technology for fabricating fuel, producing heavy water, and manufacturing all the equipment that is needed to support the construction of Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors (PHWRs).

The Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited has mastered the design and operation of PHWRs of various ratings, the highest being 700 MW. Three 700 MW units are already working, and the fourth is about to be completed. Two more are in an advanced stage of construction. In 2017, the central government sanctioned the construction of 10 700 MW PHWRs and work on these units is progressing.

A regulatory body was established in the 1980s and has developed the capability and capacity to regulate nuclear power plants. The Bhabha Atomic Research Centre has developed technologies to reprocess spent nuclear fuel to recover valuable materials and handle nuclear waste. As a result of these efforts, nuclear power generation is a technically-feasible, affordable and safe option for India.

The SHANTI Bill These successes have emboldened the central government to set a target of 100 GW of nuclear installed capacity by mid-century. Both Houses of Parliament have passed The Sustainable Harnessing and Advancement of Nuclear Energy for Transforming India (SHANTI) Bill, 2025. The Bill is an overarching piece of legislation and combines provisions included in the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, and the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.

It says that the existing Atomic Energy Regulatory Board "shall be deemed to have been constituted under this Act". The Bill ensures that the prime responsibility for safety, security and safeguards lies with the licensee of the facility. The target set for nuclear energy is ambitious. The Bill passed by Parliament is a bold step.

India needs ambitious targets and bold steps to become a developed country. R.B. Grover is Distinguished Professor Emeritus, Homi Bhabha National Institute, and Member, Atomic Energy Commission
