Category: Editorial
Title: A bold step amid an ambitious nuclear energy Part One

A bold step amid an ambitious nuclear energy target

The SHANTI Bill, 2025, will help India's nuclear energy plans Human development correlates with energy consumption. In a seminal paper published in Scientific American in 1971, Earl Cook traced the growth in per capita energy consumption through stages, from primitive to technological man. The primitive man needed energy only for food.

The energy needs for home and commerce were added at the hunting stage. When humans became agriculturists, their energy needs also arose from industry, agriculture and transportation. The energy needs for food, home, commerce, agriculture and transportation continued to increase through the industrial and technological stages.

The present era belongs to digital technologies, and the digitalisation of the economy demands additional energy. Growth rate and generation The metric "Human Development Index (HDI)" is a fair representation of human development. It combines three important indicators, viz., per capita income, education and health.

Using the correlation between HDI and per capita Final Energy Consumption (FEC), one can determine the level of energy needed to reach a specific HDI. As a member of the G-20 grouping, India rubs shoulders with countries that have an HDI above 0.9. Estimates indicate that to reach 0.9, and considering further improvements in energy efficiency and electrification of end uses, India will need to generate about 24,000 Terra-Watt-Hours (TWh) per annum (Curr.

Sci., 2022, 122(5), 517 - 527). As a part of it, about 60% will be used as electricity, and the rest to generate hydrogen in electrolysers. Hydrogen is needed to decarbonise sectors such as the production of steel, fertilizers and plastics. When alternative processes for producing hydrogen are developed at scale, less electricity will be needed.

The generation in 2023-24 was about 1,950 TWh, and the CAGR in the recent past has been about 4.8%. Maintaining a growth rate at about this level, it would be possible to generate 24,000 TWh per annum in four to five decades. However, there are two complexities. First, India has to decarbonise its energy mix.

Therefore, the growth in electricity generation must be accompanied by end-use electrification and a redesign of the energy mix. The present share of electricity in the FEC is about 22% and must rise significantly. The present energy mix is one that is heavily reliant on fossil fuels, and has to be replaced by energy sources that do not emit carbon.

That implies that India has to generate more using hydro, nuclear, solar and wind power. The decarbonised energy mix In India, hydro and wind potential is limited. India is densely populated and it precludes diverting large tracts of land for the deployment of solar photovoltaic. While the full potential of hydro, solar and wind must be exploited, their potential is insufficient to provide the energy level necessary to achieve an HDI above 0.9.

Therefore, nuclear generation has to be ramped up. Until that is done, India will have to continue exploiting fossil fuels. Second, solar and wind are intermittent sources. Electricity generated by photovoltaic cells or windmills is variable. Therefore, to match electricity supply with demand, it must be stored when it is in excess and augmented when generation is less than demand.

Storage is expensive and providing storage to address seasonal variations in solar and wind is prohibitively expensive. To provide affordable electricity to consumers, the electricity mix must have sufficient baseload generation capacity  -  that is, generation that is not dependent on seasons or time of day. Nuclear power plants are base-load and must be a part of a decarbonised energy mix.
