Category: Editorial
Title: A budget for the deep tech ecosystem the

A budget for the deep tech ecosystem & the mitras building it

The mitras building it 'AI and foreign data centers got their tax holiday gift this year - a truly special welcome to establish Indian data centers as global nodes for the entire world' As a founder, the first thing that stands out in this budget is the focus on ecosystem building as opposed to just a reiteration of money for technology growth. There is as much focus on manufacturing and infrastructure creation as there is focus on human capital building. For example - the Semiconductor Mission 2.0 clearly shows this approach.

This budget looks at the entire semiconductor value chain - from equipment and fabrication facilities to technicians and engineers. This "full-stack" thinking shows that the government is attempting to balance investments and supply chain building, and with training and operational know-how. In fact, the same tone extends to advanced manufacturing - duty exemptions for aviation components on the one side are balanced against Hi Tech tool rooms being set up as digitally enabled service bureaus.

Again the subtle yet clear dual emphasis on people and hardware stands out. AI and foreign data centers got their tax holiday gift this year - a truly special welcome to establish Indian data centers as global nodes for the entire world. This is poised to allow everyone from data center operators to thermal engineers to AI compute engineers to firmly root themselves in India.

Finally, from a founder's perspective - the introduction of 'Corporate Mitras' seems to address a recurring bottleneck for technology focused firms - compliance. Affordable, structured, governance support also highlights empathy for deep tech founders beyond all the advantages it brings. So, is the change in share buyback taxation, especially the higher effective tax on promoters - This will nudge promoter led companies to focus on reinvestments in their business as opposed to financially engineering individual capital gains.

Moreover, this is the first time a formal committee seems to have been formed to assess the impact of AI on the workforce - yet another example of focus on people and talent. On the whole, this budget feels like it has been designed keeping builders in mind  - pairing manufacturing incentives and tax support with real investments in the people who will actually run these technology ecosystems. By Srinath Ravichandran
