Category: Editorial
Title: A cess for two disparate ends is unconvincing

A cess for two disparate ends is unconvincing

The Health Security se National Security Bill leaves room for the Centre to adjust revenue sharing with States The Central government is introducing an important tax measure called the Health Security se National Security (HSNS) cess on the paan masala sector. It is to be imposed through the Health Security se National Security Cess Bill, 2025 (Bill). The Bill, passed by both Houses of Parliament and pending President's approval, is proposed to be collected after the GST Compensation Cess is phased out next year.

A cess is an earmarked measure. Meaning, the collected revenue is earmarked for a "specific purpose" as referred to in Article 270 of the Constitution. A cess may be a tax, raising funds for public purposes at large, or a fee, funding a particular service. According to Section 7 of the Bill, the HSNS cess is earmarked to fund the "expenditure on the national security of India and for public health".

The taxable person is the owner, possessor, operator of paan masala machines or persons undertaking any process that (directly or indirectly) produces paan masala. Two purposes At first blush, the HSNS cess is peculiar as two very distinct purposes are funded by one measure. Typically, cesses have been imposed for a single purpose such as for primary education.

A single purpose signals that the entire proceeds (minus administrative expenses) would be spent for such goal. With the HSNS cess, the Bill not only picks two unrelated purposes but also does not allocate revenue between the two purposes. None of the finer details is worked out. Hence, for example, the inter se allocation between health security and national security may be 50:50 but also 20:80.

The Bill leaves enough room for any proportion to be adopted and, for it to vary from one year to the next. More fundamentally, the HSNS cess continues the trend of earmarking for purposes that otherwise belong to the exclusive purview of State governments. For example, the erstwhile Krishi Kalyan and Swachh Bharat cesses were earmarked for farmer welfare and sanitation, respectively, and both fall within the exclusive competence and mandate of State governments.

HSNS cess is partially earmarked for public health which is an exclusive State subject. Once the Central government chooses the cess route, the proceeds are not required to be shared with State governments based on the recommendations of the Finance Commission (FC). By constitutional design cesses are kept outside the divisible pool (as per Article 270).

However, when the Central government earmarks for purposes that are exclusively conferred on State governments, we are faced with a quandary. The Centre should not execute schemes on matters entrusted to States. Hence, the only way to spend the revenues is to share it with the State governments. State subject During the Lok Sabha debates, the Finance Minister explained that health is a State subject and that HSNS cess proceeds would be shared with the State governments.

Also, only the proceeds pertaining to health will be shared, so the proportion referred to earlier is rather crucial for State governments. Considering the distribution was inevitable, would it not have been better to have introduced the HSNS cess as a regular tax? Yes, but then the proceeds would have been part of the divisible pool.

Devolution would have been based on FC's recommendations which are tabled in Parliament and are publicly available. State governments could have applied the proceeds to any purposes it deemed fit as there would have been no ex-ante earmarking. However, with the cess route, the Central government has the flexibility to not follow FC's recommendations.

The Bill mentions that the HSNS cess will be used to fund "activities, schemes and programmes" notified by the Central government at a later point. Hence, devolution may be contingent on implementation of centrally determined schemes and fulfilment of any other conditions specified. For the State governments, there is bound to be opacity, fear of inequitable treatment, lack of predictability and little freedom to spend based on needs of local constituents.

By Ashrita Prasad Kotha The writer is Assistant Professor, National Law School of India University. She was assisted by Siddhant Pengoriya, Student, Vth Year, NLSIU
