Category: Editorial
Title: A ChinaUS summit that drew global attention Part Two

A China-U.S. summit that drew global attention

Over the past three years, more than 40,000 American youths have participated in exchange and study programmes, significantly boosting interactions between the two peoples, especially among young people. A poll by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs showed that 53% of Americans favour friendly cooperation and engagement with China. The Taiwan question Sensitive issues are the "red line".

The Taiwan question was an important topic taken up at the summit. President Xi emphasised that the Taiwan question is the most important issue between the two countries. If the Taiwan issue is handled well, the overall relationship will be stable. Otherwise, the two countries will have clashes and even conflicts, and the entire relationship will be in great jeopardy.

"Taiwan independence" and cross-Strait peace are irreconcilable as fire and water. China and the U.S. both agree on the vital importance of safeguarding cross-Strait peace and stability. The U.S. must exercise the utmost prudence in handling the Taiwan issue. In an exclusive interview with Fox News, Mr.

Trump made it clear that "we are not looking at somebody say 'let's go independent because the United States is backing us'. I'm not looking to have somebody go independent and we're supposed to travel 9,500 miles to fight a war." This demonstrates that the U.S. has understood China's position and responded to China's concerns.

China-U.S. stability supports Asia Third, what does the China-U.S. rapprochement mean for China-India relations? Some people worry that the rapprochement between China and the U.S. may compress India's diplomatic and strategic space. Such concerns are unwarranted. The remarkable achievements of China and India are built on the hard work and wisdom of their own peoples, and are by no means the result of others' generosity, much less subject to the ups and downs of any single bilateral relationship.

The strategic stability of China-U.S. relations provides positive and stable expectations for the world, which will benefit India, Asia, and the world as a whole. China deeply understands India's aspiration for national rejuvenation and sincerely supports India's foreign policy of strategic autonomy.

We stand ready to work with the Indian side to strengthen high-level exchanges, deepen mutually beneficial cooperation, enhance people-to-people exchanges and promote multilateral coordination within mechanisms such as BRICS, so as to achieve the sustained, healthy and stable development of bilateral relations. The way for major countries to get along well lies in seeking common ground while reserving differences and coexisting peacefully. The path to regional prosperity lies in common progress and shared flourishing.

Perhaps this is the very lesson the "Beijing Moment" has taught the world. By Xu Feihong Chinese Ambassador to India
