Category: Editorial
Title: A cloud system for agriculture Part One

A cloud system for agriculture

Leveraging agri-PVs to meet energy demand of data centres will be a win-win for all Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu has proved to be a visionary and an investment-friendly politician. He has bagged the biggest investment in recent years with Google committing $15 billion to build a one-gigawatt artificial intelligence (AI) data centre at Visakhapatnam. This is supposed to be Asia's largest data centre, and is likely to be operational from 2028.

One of the key requirements for such a large data centre is 24 gigawatt-hours of power per day. Cutting supplies to other sectors, especially agriculture, to supply uninterrupted power to this data centre can lead to a backlash. Augmenting overall power supply through thermal sources is highly polluting.

So, Andhra Pradesh will have to look for either nuclear energy or renewables like solar power. And here is a chance for agri-households to participate in this emerging AI boom by providing power while cultivating their lands. Agri-photovoltaics (PV) promote the dual use of land. Farmers can be providers of food as well as power, while augmenting their incomes manifold.

An agri-PV system involves solar panels mounted 10-12 feet above farmland to enable seamless cultivation of high-value crops. Two irrigated crops beneath the agri-PV panels can be chosen to ensure diversification  -  such as shade-loving, high-value crops (ginger, chillies, vegetables, etc.) Solar thus becomes a "third crop" and augments farmers' incomes (eight to 10 times on ICRIER pilots). Andhra Pradesh is already a pioneer, having introduced a policy innovation that grants data centres a deemed distribution licence (DDL), allowing hyperscale operators to procure and manage their own power rather than draw it as ordinary consumers.

However, this needs to be followed up with a series of complementary measures to avoid any power cuts for other sectors. A potential measure is that Google invests a modest slice of its capital to develop captive solar power generation capacity on farmers' fields, where farmers can participate in equity and be co-owners of the power while cultivating their lands. This is a tested model which can lift household incomes.

In the process, Google will build enormous goodwill with farmers, and it would yield a political dividend. ICRIER has already set up pilots of agri-PVs in Rajasthan, Odisha, and Madhya Pradesh. These need to be scaled up, and Naidu can take the lead here. But it would require an ecosystem of farmers organised into a community-owned solar utility cluster (on the lines of milk cooperatives); as well as a special-purpose vehicle (SPV) company where farmers too hold some equity (borrowed from banks) but contribute mainly through granting utilisation of their land.

A blended stack of investment from Google and public finance will help in developing the requisite infrastructure. Google could provide zero- (or very low- ) interest long-term loans that could be adjusted against the energy supplied by the SPV. PM-KUSUM can be tweaked to provide capital subsidy. Commercial capital could also be leveraged with credit guarantee from the Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for Small and Medium Enterprises.

Agri-PVs can also ensure value addition through processing, and that farmers are able to sell energy to the Google data centre. Under the new DDL licence, Google can contract agri-PV-generated power through open-access and banking arrangements and stand behind it as a long-term off-taker. The farmers' solar utility would thus gain a creditworthy, permanent customer.
