Category: Editorial
Title: A dangerous march towards a Himalayan ecocide Part Three

A dangerous march towards a Himalayan ecocide

Crucially, the clearance of deodar forests removes the natural anchors that bind fragile soils, directly accelerating erosion and amplifying the risk of landslides and floods. While this development provides the fuse, climate change acts as a powerful "risk multiplier." It intensifies the threat by creating erratic rainfall patterns, supercharging weather events and accelerating glacial melt. This leads to a dangerous "water peak phase" of increased run-off and catastrophic flash floods, which, once the glaciers have fully retreated, inevitably gives way to a prolonged phase of water scarcity and drought.

These physical pressures are compounded by unsustainable human behaviours, including unregulated tourism, unchecked vehicular traffic in fragile zones, and the absence of carrying capacity assessments or functional solid waste management plans. These symptoms point to deeper, systemic governance failures: a persistent prioritisation of short-term, economic gains over long-term disaster resilience, and a chronic inability to plan and implement genuine, science-based sustainable development policies. The subcontinent's foundation This ground reality solidifies the axiom that "without the Himalayas, there is no India." The range is more than just a geographical entity; it is the very foundation of the subcontinent's existence.

The Himalayas have shaped India into a fertile and habitable land, while also forging a syncretic cultural identity as enduring and majestic as the mountains themselves. The continuing sequence of disasters in the Himalayas is a non-negotiable lesson in earth system science and a loud reminder that India exists because of the Himalaya. Mallika Bhanot is a member of Ganga Ahvaan, a citizen forum working for Himalaya-Ganga conservation, and Member of the Bhagirathi Eco-sensitive Zone Monitoring Committee.

C.P. Rajendran is an Adjunct Professor at the National Institute of Advanced Studies, Bengaluru, and author of the book, The Rumbling Earth: The Story of Indian Earthquakes
