Category: Editorial
Title: A stitch in time saves nine Part Two

A stitch in time saves nine

Delays in GST refunds and export incentive disbursals also constrain liquidity. The next is labour and skilling. India's apparel sector is highly dependent on migrant labour, moving from Bihar, Odisha, and Jharkhand into production clusters such as Bengaluru, Tiruppur, and Surat. There are high attrition and absenteeism during the festival season, when assembly lines fall short.

In our opinion, a more sustainable model is to move factories to where the cheap labour is. The gains are multiple  -  higher female labour participation, lower migration costs, and a pathway for labour-surplus states like Bihar to accelerate manufacturing-led growth. Finally, with the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with the UK and the EU FTA, India has finally achieved tariff parity with competitors such as Bangladesh and Vietnam.

India needs seamless end-to-end integration of trade processes so that exporters can move goods, documents, and approvals with speed, predictability, and minimal compliance costs. The reform agenda for India is clear  -  building an ecosystem approach to competitiveness. PM-MITRA (Mega Integrated Textile Region and Apparel) parks, announced in 2021, embody this approach by integrating the five pillars of competitiveness  -  scale, infrastructure, finance, skills, and market access  - within a single institutional framework.

Their timely implementation is critical if India wants to seize the current window of opportunity in global apparel trade. Complemented by the export promotion mission and the integrated programme for textiles, these reforms can reposition India as a scale-driven, digitally-enabled, sustainable, and gender-inclusive global sourcing hub. The future will depend on whether India can stitch together an ecosystem where firms, finance, institutions, and supply chains move with the speed, scale, and predictability that global value chains demand.

By Ashok Gulati and Sulakshana Rao, respectively, Distinguished Professor and Senior Fellow, ICRIER
