Category: Editorial
Title: A tax moratorium to enable a foreign AI Part Two

A tax moratorium to enable a foreign AI invasion

In relation to these pressing concerns, they may review their own 'digitalisable goods' imports, and the customs duties loss from it, and feel that it may not be that big a deal. This may be why country after developing country has been caving in on the Moratorium issue. It is unclear how long India, Brazil and South Africa can resist such U.S.

pressure unless they focus on the real 'AI invasion' risks posed by the Moratorium. In their own bi/pluri-lateral digital trade agreements, the U.S. and its allies are increasingly clear, in their definition sections, that 'digital products' subject to customs duty moratorium, include services. With no authoritative WTO or trade deals text using the term 'digitalisable goods', it now solely appears in the documents by developing countries and pro-South analyses.

This is discordant and distracting, even if the 'digitalisable goods' approach was useful in earlier stages. Policymakers should either enshrine it explicitly in the Moratorium text or stop treating this obscure and outdated term as the Moratorium's main focus, and instead be upfront in dealing with the real issue of digital services. Even the 'weights' of an AI model can be imported via an external drive and run on local data to produce AI outputs.

But does this make AI a 'digitalisable good'? This deliberately pushes the argument to its extreme, highlighting how dubious this category has become. Today, virtually everything digital qualifies as a digital service  -  streaming movies (Netflix) or music (Spotify) are already considered services under established definitions, including at the WTO.

The moratorium is really about border taxing AI For the U.S., the Moratorium is about securing the AI-driven future; in any case, no one is currently imposing customs duties on the so-called 'digitalisable goods'. AI will soon be embedded in nearly all socio-economic activities, with economies reorganising themselves around AI platforms. Current trajectories indicate that almost all of such foundation AI will be owned by the U.S.

and China. In 2019, the UN Trade and Development (UNCTAD) estimated that 90% of the capitalisation of the world's top 70 platform companies lay inside the U.S. and China. This was pre-AI. AI is even more super-concentrated. We may be looking at nearly 100% of the top 10 AI platforms owned by the U.S.

and China. Such is the scenario in which developing countries need to locate their Moratorium-related positions. The least that one can do at this stage is not to give up the right to border tax digital/AI services. Even Big Tech leaders such as Bill Gates, Sam Altman and Elon Musk have spoken about taxing AI profits for universal basic income schemes to offset job losses and wage depression due to AI.

But the question for developing countries is this. While the U.S. and China might as well super-tax their AI super-corporations for universal basic income and other welfare schemes, who would they tax, and how; with almost all top foundation AI corporations in the U.S. or China? Kai-Fu Lee, former head of Google China, and former President of Microsoft Research Asia, observed in an article in The New York Times (2017): "So if most countries will not be able to tax ultra-profitable A.I.

companies to subsidize their workers, what options will they have? I foresee only one: Unless they wish to plunge their people into poverty, they will be forced to negotiate with whichever country supplies most of their A.I. software  -  China or the United States  -  to essentially become that country's economic dependent, taking in welfare subsidies in exchange for letting the "parent" nation's A.I.
