Category: Editorial
Title: A tax moratorium to enable a foreign AI Part One

A tax moratorium to enable a foreign AI invasion

The push for a permanent moratorium signals the U.S.'s bid to dominate the AI-driven global economy Towards the end of the 1990s, artifacts such as books and music/video CDs, which were physical things, and thus subject to customs duties on import, began to also be streamed across borders over the Internet. Importing countries were worried about the lost customs duty revenue. At the 1998 World Trade Organization (WTO) Ministerial, members agreed to a temporary moratorium on customs duties for so-called 'digitalisable goods', recognising it as a novel phenomenon.

The actual term mentioned in the text however is 'electronic transmissions'. This 'E-commerce Moratorium' has since typically been extended from one Ministerial to the next, currently till the next WTO Ministerial in Yaoundé, Cameroon, Africa, between March 26-29, 2026. The United States comes to this Ministerial with the top priority of making this Moratorium permanent.

Under intense tariff-related and other threats from the Trump administration, opposition to the Moratorium is breaking down among the developing countries. Recently, Indonesia, previously a key opponent of the Moratorium, agreed with the U.S. to make it permanent. In its trade deal discussions with the U.S., India also seems to be under intense pressure to concede.

The Yaounde Ministerial will find this issue centre stage. What the subject matter of the Moratorium is The Moratorium text says: Members will "continue their current practice of not imposing customs duties on electronic transmissions". But no one seems certain what 'electronic transmissions' stand for, and, therefore, what exactly the customs duty moratorium is applicable to.

Developing countries have long argued that the definitions should be clarified first. However, the U.S. and its allies have not engaged with this obvious rational approach, casting doubt on their real motives. Unfortunately, developing countries have so far been unable to expose this bluff. They have not understood the U.S.'s real intention, which is tied to the AI-driven future, where the primary flow of value across borders will be AI, with AI power hyper concentrated in the U.S.

and China. Trade negotiators rely on their IT ministries to advise them on such matters, but IT ministries in developing countries are typically besotted with positive digital and AI possibilities. They take a short-term approach to working off U.S./China cloud/AI, not appreciating the emerging structural digital realities.

The duties in the Moratorium text are meant to be interpreted by the U.S. in the near future as possible border taxes on AI flows. They seek to preempt any such possibilities, which is all what the Moratorium is really about. Developing countries also hope that by avoiding discussions on clarifications, the subject will, in good faith, remain limited to 'digitalisable goods'.

However, this term is not actually mentioned in the Moratorium text, and in emerging contexts, such an approach risks becoming akin to burying one's head in the sand. Some key developing countries such as India have huge digital services exports, and they fear discussions going in the direction of taxing them. However, with fast-expanding cloud and AI context, and a likely withering of coding as service and even software as service, their digital trade surplus could soon be deeply in the red.

Countries may devise new opportunities, but that requires all options to be kept open. Digitalisable goods may be an obsolete term An abiding belief among the Moratorium-opposing nations that this is only about digitalisable goods has now become counter-productive. The Trump administration's pressure in this matter is severe, and countries face tough choices with immediate concerns in key areas such as agriculture and manufacturing topmost on their mind.
