Category: Editorial
Title: A turning point for nuclear deterrence Part Two

A turning point for nuclear deterrence

And Russia, the pendulum may be swinging back. China, Russia and the U.S. are ambitiously modernising their nuclear stockpiles. China has reportedly added 100 warheads a year since 2023 to reach a total of 600. In 2015, the U.K. reversed a 2006 decision to reduce its stockpile and is at 225 warheads.

The last remaining arms control agreement between Russia and the U.S. - New START  -  expires on February 5, and if both states start increasing their stockpiles from the current 5,459 and 5,277, respectively, it will send a clear message of moving back to Cold War ideas of deterrence. Lessons from Ukraine The war in Ukraine should have led to a more serious debate about what deters.

Russian President Vladimir Putin had made nuclear threats before his invasion and then again in October 2022. Yet those threats were countered not by the certainty of a nuclear response, but by the certainty of a robust response that left the nuclear element unclear. It is worth remembering that Ukraine  -  a non-nuclear country  -  has been able to defend itself against a nuclear adversary.

Yes, it has had help and yes, it has lost territory, but Ukraine has not yet been defeated by its nuclear neighbour. Therefore, what happens in the next few months as Europe comes up with a security architecture that does not rely on the U.S could reshape nuclear thinking. Apart from some tepid discussion about how France and the U.K.

might extend their nuclear umbrella to cover Europe, most of the previous debate appeared to return to hugging the U.S. ever closer. In the meantime, an ad hoc grouping of mainly European states, called the Coalition of the Willing, has come together to guarantee Ukraine's security. Ukraine now has experience in defending itself against a nuclear state.

Against this backdrop, whether Europe chooses to base its new security architecture on some sort of replacement nuclear alliance, or on a defensive alliance that may have a nuclear element, will shape future discussions about nuclear weapons and deterrence. Priyanjali Malik writes on nuclear politics and security.
