Category: Editorial
Title: AfPak is a crisis years in the making Part Two

Af-Pak is a crisis years in the making

This thus makes the situation intractable. Pakistan is currently facing an internal crisis, with dual insurgencies within the country  -  both religious and ethno-nationalist  -  and the state's capitulation in front of them because of the lack of a coherent approach. In this context, for the Pakistani establishment, taking a provocative stance is considered imperative.

With an apparent thaw in the ties between Afghanistan and India, it also pegs the blame on the collusion between the two countries to foment terror within Pakistan and states its readiness on both the eastern and western sectors. Countries in the region and beyond have their own interests at stake when it comes to the intensification of fighting in the region. China, Russia, and Iran have offered their support in facilitating dialogue between the two sides, whereas both countries have had conversations with the leaders of Türkiye and Saudi Arabia in order to find a solution to the crisis.

Qatar also offered to play a mediating role. While the extent to which third parties could effect a change in the situation is unclear, considering their failure in the previous phase of hostilities, a certain degree of pressure can contain violence in the short run. Pakistan is also bolstered by the tacit support offered by the President of the United States, who has acknowledged the country's right to self-defence against the Afghan Taliban.

Notwithstanding the ongoing standoff, the TTP, as well as its factions like the Jamaat ul Ahrar (JuA) and the Hafiz Gul Bahadur (HGB) group, have urged their militants operating in Pakistan to intensify their attacks within the country, with JuA calling for more strikes in the urban centres. This indicates that there is no one-stop solution to the current crisis. For the Taliban as well, the optics of not responding decisively to Pakistan's aggression are grave, considering it is focused on legitimising its rule and may see the cost of being complacent in the face of external aggression as grave.

The real victims in the current situation are the civilians on both sides of the border who are caught in the crossfire. Even as Pakistan seems intent on making the Taliban realise the strategic costs of hosting militant groups within the country, it cannot hope for a resolution of the crisis unless it takes stock of its own long-standing policy of aiding and abetting terror proxies against its neighbours and realises the folly of believing that the actions of the groups which you foster will always align with your interests in the long run. By Shivam Shekhawat The writer is a junior fellow with ORF's Strategic Studies Programme
