Category: Editorial
Title: AI and cyber the double helix of todays Part Two

AI and cyber, the double helix of today's security threats

Anthropic has reached a stage today where with Mythos, it creates the spectre of all-encompassing power residing in a single instrument that is not subject to any rules. China, perhaps, has its own version of Anthropic or something resembling it, but this is of little comfort to the rest of the world. What is becoming clearly evident is that an attacker with the latest version poses a grave threat to not merely one country but an entire civilisation.

An AI 'power shift' As AI technologies become more rampant and uncontrollable, existing rules concerning cyber security may require to be completely rewritten. Many experts warn that as "Agentic Autonomous Operations" become even more sophisticated, the world could reach an inflection point that has grave forebodings for the world. Whether Mythos is the harbinger of this is yet to be determined, but it is generally acknowledged that the newer generations of AI machines provide opportunities for 'rogue groups' to demonstrate capabilities that were once associated with only nation states.

As Agentic AI begins to displace Generative AI, enabling it to act more autonomously, threat levels are certain to go up still further. AI has, hence, the potential to become the dominant source of military and economic power, even as the rules to govern AI are still in a fledgling state. The bugle call has already been sounded by the pontiff of Anthropic, the AI firm that makes models such as Mythos, that it has the potential to become the dominant source of military and economic power as civilisation advances.

Notwithstanding the god-like properties of existing modern AI models, experts warn that they are often subject to "hallucinations", thus giving scope for distortions, producing misleading reactions. Judgments in such cases tend, quite often, to be subjective. Even otherwise, biases are known to creep into decisions dictated by AI, enhancing the danger posed by unrestricted reliance on AI.

Furthermore, experts warn that it is vitally important to guard against such 'algorithmic radicalisation', and ensure that AI platforms do not push opinion makers towards extreme views. A future that needs oversight, wisdom The world, thus, appears to have reached a tipping point in AI progress and development. Already, some companies that are leading the AI charge are accusing others of stealing their technologies and expanding on them to their advantage.

The latest is a charge made by the U.S. against China, viz., that China's 'Moonshot' AI stole from Anthropic's most sophisticated AI Large Language Model 'Fable', to help create its latest AI version. Predictably, China has rejected this charge, but it reflects the intensity of the competition between the U.S.

and China in this area. If Anthropic's claim is true  -  that its latest model has surpassed "all but the most skilled humans" in finding and exploiting security vulnerabilities in everything from popular operating systems to cryptographic software  -  the world could face a new kind of apocalypse. The world has steadily progressed from abiding concerns of stagnant economic growth to doomsday technologies, and this merits a great deal of introspection.

Altruism is not enough to decide on how to handle a technology that is about to eat up the world. There are several aspects of advanced AI that clearly demand more introspection, but this is not evident. As AI increasingly enters into the arena of defence sensing and warning, there is a need not only to keep machines under human control but also to ensure that AI-dictated warnings do not outrun proper understanding and reality.
