Category: Editorial
Title: AI as decisionmaker Consent not enough Part One

AI as decision-maker: Consent not enough

As AI systems become more complex, businesses may find that effective governance requires a level of explainability beyond what the DPDP Act demands With the advent of new-age technologies and AI, the role of personal data within organisations is changing. Historically, data was collected to support human or manual decision-making. Increasingly, it is being used to train systems that generate recommendations, predictions, and, in some cases, decisions.

From detecting fraud and assessing creditworthiness to screening job applicants, AI is moving from an assistive to a decision-making tool. This raises an important question: is obtaining consent to process personal data sufficient when the real impact on individuals arises from the decisions generated from that data? The Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act, 2023, appears, at first glance, to offer a straightforward answer.

The Act is built largely on consent-based lawful processing of personal data and lays emphasis on such consent and principles of transparency. Data principals must be informed about the purposes for which their data is being processed and retain rights on access, correction, erasure, nomination, grievance redress, etc. Yet AI challenges that assumption in a fundamental way.

A customer applying for a loan may consent to the use of personal data. A job applicant may consent to processing of information submitted during recruitment, etc. In each case, the consent is sought for collection and processing of the personal data. It doesn't necessarily address how an AI system will interpret the data, draw inferences, and how the inferences influence the eventual decision.

An AI decision may be entirely based on lawful consent and still yield results that are inaccurate, biased, or difficult to explain due to an absence of manual interference. Consent, by itself, provides little protection against such risks because the issue lies not in the use of data but the operation of the decision-making AI system. This is increasingly reflected in Indian and global regulatory discourses.

The EU's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) has regulatory protections on certain forms of automated decision-making and profiling. NITI Aayog's Principles for Responsible AI: A Background discussed how AI systems can generate risks relating to exclusion, discrimination, and lack of accountability, particularly in sectors where algorithmic outputs influence consequential decisions. It also focused on governance steps that could mitigate these risks such as explainability, accountability structures, audit mechanisms, and human oversight.

In many respects, the recommendations foreshadow safeguards that are increasingly being discussed for high-impact AI systems. More importantly, they reinforce a recurring theme in India's AI policy discourse: lawful access to data, while important, is insufficient on its own to ensure trustworthy AI outcomes. NITI Aayog's National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence too recognised that AI raises challenges beyond traditional privacy concerns (collection, processing) including for automated decision-making.

It benchmarked privacy and data protection laws against international standards like the GDPR and referred to France's right to explanation for administrative algorithmic decisions, while observing India's privacy framework needed to evolve with understanding AI-related risks. Although such initiatives aren't legally binding, they signal an expectation that organisations should be able to justify not only their use of data, but also the outcomes from it. The Supreme Court released the Draft Regulations for Use of AI in Courts, 2026, giving an important indication of how sectors in India are starting to approach AI governance especially in the context of automated decision-making.
