Category: Editorial
Title: AI wont take Indias tech jobs away Part One

AI won't take India's tech jobs away

With GCCs scaling up and IT firms having strong hiring plans, AI will only redefine the kind of jobs that will be in demand The recent AI Impact summit had some takeaways: The world's fourth-largest economy - a rising power powered by talent, entrepreneurship and demographic strength, is not going to be an AI spectator. There is a decisive shift to building AI-embraced infrastructure for highways, energy, telecom, and so on. Union IT Minister Ashwini Vaishnav says India expects to attract $200 billion of AI investments over the next two years.

Why are global AI/tech companies pouring in investments into India? It's India's consumer market they are after. Already 100 million ChatGPT users are there, mostly consumers. For decades, India's $300 billion tech services sector, employing nearly six million people, was known primarily for cost arbitrage.

The anxiety around AI shrinking tech jobs is overblown. Yann LeCun, godfather of AI and Meta's former chief AI scientist, has consistently argued that fears of AI causing mass permanent job losses are misplaced and absurd. LeCun views AI as an amplifier of human intelligence rather than a replacement.

The Indian IT industry has endured many disruptions: the dotcom crash of 2000-02 that saw massive project cancellations, pricing pressure and delayed payments; the Global Financial Crisis (2008-09), a recession where clients froze IT spending, renegotiated contracts and currency volatility was the norm; visa and immigration restrictions; and the Covid pandemic  -  leading to project delays and client uncertainty. So, historically IT services have faced economic downturns, tech disruptions, political and regulatory pressures, talent and margin pressures. Yet the industry has shown strong resilience by shifting from cost arbitrage to value creation, manpower-based model to now digital and AI led services and IP + AI based revenue.

History suggests technology has enabled new kinds of jobs. The last few decades' rise of Indian IT services companies was because of multiple new technologies, including the internet, cloud, and mobile. These actually created more jobs even as they led to productivity improvements across industries. When outsourcing reduced enterprise software costs, IT budgets did not contract  -  they expanded.

As prices fell, volumes surged. Why should this time be different? ChatGPT's high-voltage debut in 2023 intensified the debate around AI and job loss. Automation has compressed low-value work  -  repetitive coding, application maintenance, documentation and some BPO tasks that once required large teams.

AI can generate code in seconds, create testing scripts and draft documentation automatically. Boards are asking whether companies can run leaner. Yet, for enterprise-level adoption, and to ensure stable, secure operations, human insight is vital in software testing, coding, and this will ensure that jobs remain intact or even grow, even as there is some displacement in low-end roles.

Next level of productivity We are entering a different orbit of productivity. AI writes the first draft of code; engineers focus on refining, contextualising and solving complex domain problems. Value shifts from billable hours to faster, higher-quality outcomes. India's IT services firms operate across four major business areas: implementation of large enterprise packages, customised software development, R&D exports, and infrastructure management.

R&D services, advanced engineering and complex transformation projects are hard to replace; they may expand. Code generation is only one slice of the enterprise technology lifecycle. The real complexity lies in integrating new systems into legacy environments, securing them, deploying them at scale and maintaining them over time.
