Category: Editorial
Title: AIpowered tax governance in India and its Part Two

AI-powered tax governance in India and its challenges

Recently, using big data analysis and AI tools, the ITD discovered that restaurants across India had suppressed sales turnover of ₹70,000 crore since 2019-20 using sophisticated methods such as selective deletion of cash invoices, post-billing modifications, wiping of sales data, and manipulation of bill value. Many advanced countries, such as Australia, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States have successfully implemented AI-enabled platforms modelled on the PI and have generated additional revenue. Concerns and risks As India transitions to algorithmic tax governance, several operational, ethical, and legal issues require serious attention.

The first is about data provenance and quality. AI systems such as the PI are only as good as the data they are trained on. They could identify outliers, but cannot always distinguish evasion from legitimate complexity. Data on variable-income professionals using prior savings, clerical errors, or joint family financial structures can trigger false positives.

Without accessible human review, taxpayers must prove the legitimacy of flagged patterns. The second is on the algorithmic bias. AI models trained on historical enforcement data can unintentionally duplicate existing socio-economic or geographic biases, identifying tax fraud more often in some taxpayer or geographic areas than others, as demonstrated by the Dutch childcare benefits scandal.

The third is on the issue of explainability and due process. For an AI-based tax compliance system to be legitimate, taxpayers need to know why they were identified, how their information is used, how the system arrives at its decisions, and have a clear, easy way to challenge decisions. There must be a human-in-the-loop evaluation for any decision with serious consequences for taxpayers.

The fourth is about the concerns over data privacy and security. Accessing sensitive financial and personal information about taxpayers creates a big attack surface for potential exploitation. Finally, India lacks an AI ombudsperson to review contested decisions, a requirement for algorithmic impact assessments and public reporting of false-positive and appeal-success rates, and external audits of risk-scoring models.

Without such strong AI governance guardrails outlined above, the PI might turn into a hidden surveillance system that compromises accountability and tax system fairness, making taxpayers less trusting and more resistant. India must make a clear choice: to pursue a modern tax intelligence system that is both ethical and effective. Sthanu R.

Nair teaches economics and public policy at the Indian Institute of Management (IIM) Kozhikode, Kerala. Ranjith Gundaboina works on Artificial Intelligence applications in financial services and was an Assistant Manager at the State Bank of India, managing credit portfolios and risk assessment. The views expressed are personal
