Category: Editorial
Title: AIs most formidable disruptor Part One

AI's most formidable disruptor

Anthropic is positioned well to play a pivotal role, especially in mission-critical AI systems Anthropic is riding the disruption wave. Elon Musk has, contentiously, even called the company "Misanthropic", suggesting that the company's AI models are against society and humankind. Disrupting IT services In February 2025, Anthropic unveiled Claude Cowork, its agentic AI tool, which has 11 plug-ins that enables it to perform workflows end-to-end, including reviewing contracts, dealing with legal documents, writing code, and coordinating tasks across teams, with no supervision.

The market response was brutal, shaving off more than $285 billion in market value across technology and IT services firms, affecting Salesforce, Intuit, Adobe, and Thomson Reuters, among others. Indian IT majors Infosys, Wipro, HCL Tech, and TCS lost between 15 and 21% by way of market capitalisation. Anthropic's legal tool is integrated with its own model.

It has also released similar tools for sales, marketing, finance, and accounting - signalling that cloud-native software and agentic AI can displace expensive SaaS (software-as- a-service) and cloud options, apart from shrinking manual effort and errors substantially. Mainframe susceptibility Then came a blog post, less than a fortnight later, about Claude being able to comprehend and contemporise COBOL - a very old mainframe programming language developed in 1959, which is still dominant in government, airline, telecom, and banking systems. That single post swiftly eroded $30 billion of IBM's market value and Indian IT stocks took a further knock, with the Nifty IT index dropping almost 5%.

COBOL programmers are scarce now, and Claude being able to manage codebases, figure dependencies, rewrite code, and produce documentation, is indeed a game changer. The inference that IT services companies' revenues deriving from related consulting, maintenance, and upgrade would get adversely impacted isn't flawed. The math is indeed revealing - we have 800 billion lines of COBOL code operating worldwide, and the modernising costs would shrink from about $12 to $3 or less per line.

As is known, there are surrounding systems, regulatory patches galore, local innovations, and the app layers on top, to consider too. That begs a question - what about the other legacy codebases? Cyber liabilities Earlier this month, Anthropic announced Mythos, which had the unprecedented capability to autonomously identify, at scale, hitherto undiscovered cybersecurity vulnerabilities.

What created panic in the ranks was when Mythos identified critical vulnerabilities undiscovered for 27 years. The model's capabilities extend to every major operating system, every major web browser, all widely used software, and IT infrastructure. Wisely, Anthropic has proactively reached out to government and key industry stakeholders to discuss the model's defensive and offensive capabilities.

Under a cybersecurity initiative called Project Glasswing, they are now restricting access to 40 tech companies, infrastructure players, and security organisations, including Microsoft, Amazon, Nvidia, Cisco, and Google. The aim is to allow rapid patching of the newly discovered vulnerabilities. US Treasury Secretary Scott Bessant and Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell convened an urgent meeting of bank CEOs and finance chieftains that was attended by CEOs of Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, and Goldman Sachs, to ensure the risks are understood and acted upon with urgency.

The move emphasises that frontier AI models could accelerate cyberattacks if deployed without adequate precautions. And equally, that AI systems meant to protect can become powerful tools for hackers, with the line between offence and defence blurring. With Anthropic researchers having declared that the model is an order of magnitude faster than previous tools, the time between discovering security bugs and their exploitation is dangerously narrow.
