Category: Editorial
Title: AIs most formidable disruptor Part Two

AI's most formidable disruptor

What next? Claude's stack demonstrates remarkable capability convergence, a distinction that's reshaping the tech world. For instance, while robotic process automation requires rule-based scripts, Claude figures it out with adaptive automation. It addresses fragmented workflows with end-to-end automation, builds trust for regulated use with reasoning transparency, and simplifies services by unifying coding, operations, and support.

Consulting could meet its disruptor in Claude. Market analysis, presentation decks, operational diagnostics, and scenario analyses are fair game, challenging slideware consulting and dated generic frameworks. The science of management itself could change in time, with Claude arguably doing a better 24×7 job of decision-making, resource allocation, performance monitoring, and optimisation, with managers becoming AI agent supervisors.

Anthropic's business has accelerated, as has the demand for Claude, moving from $9 billion revenue in 2025 to an estimated $30 billion in 2026, going by their run rate. Anthropic, currently using tensor processing units from Google, and Amazon's chips, is even contemplating designing its own chips, as part of its public commitment to strengthen US computing infrastructure. A lot has changed in an AI-native world.

Work is not executed any more by layers of people and tonnes of software. Traditional SaaS interfaces and large teams, internal or outsourced, are passé. What's needed is a cognitive layer that embeds intelligence into workflows, and orchestrates decisioning and execution end-to-end, that redefines speed, productivity, cost, and competitive advantage.

Anthropic is positioned well to play a pivotal role, especially in mission-critical AI systems. Threats OpenAI's Sam Altman has warned that as AI systems move towards "superintelligence", threats would include biological hazards and mass surveillance, if not controlled. Arguably, the bigger threat is public anger against corporate leaders over societal impact, including large-scale displacement, loss of jobs, and access to healthcare, amidst galloping costs - as exemplified by a series of unsavoury events over past months.

When unknown persons hurled a "Molotov cocktail" into Sam Altman's San Francisco residence recently, it was interpreted as an illegal expression of hostility to AI's progress. Is that the greater disruptor to worry about in the near term? Written by Anil Nair The author is the founder of ThinkStreet
