Category: Editorial
Title: Algorithms of suspicion Why AI surveillance Part One

Algorithms of suspicion: Why AI surveillance systems need a 'UPI moment' for ethics

Why AI surveillance systems need a 'UPI moment' for ethics As facial recognition and national databases merge, India's marginalised sections face a new "deep state" where data is permanent In India, people, society, politics, and economics operate under the utilitarian principle of "maximum benefits" for all. However, in recent times, surveillance technologies, techniques, and processes are disrupting democracy and the inclusive idea of Digital India. A few months ago, Delhi Police announced that they would implement a state-of-the-art Integrated Command, Control, Communication, and Computer Centre (C4I) across all regions of Delhi by June 2026 to control crime and identify "criminals" by scanning faces on the streets and flagging suspects through CCTV cameras.

For this, the Delhi Police drew inspiration from an Israeli software (a surveillance van equipped with cameras both outside and inside, along with a full data and computer setup and police operators), which has been in use since 2018 in North and Northeast Delhi. Initially, it was used to match pictures of lost and found children. However, it has since been used on several occasions: During the Prime Minister's rally at Ram Leela Maidan in 2019, in the North and Northeast Delhi riots of 2020 and 2022 (Jahangirpuri), and the Republic Day celebrations in 2023.

What was a temporary solution is quickly becoming the norm. As a result, certain areas and people are facing ghettoisation. Surveillance technologies (CCTVs, webcams, etc.), new technologies (especially those that track and record human activity through mobile applications and software), are strangely intensifying this process.

Data is a deeply political entity The Delhi Police have stated that the C4I system will function with CCTV cameras, along with national database agencies, including e-challan, telecom, and banking records, as they were doing earlier using Israeli technology. A person's image will be analysed with real-time recording, along with existing recorded data from government agencies. The data that has been fed to the technology, especially in North and Northeast Delhi, will now be used for C4I.

If there is a match of 60 per cent based on real-time data and national agencies' records, that person will be perceived as a "potential threat", even if they committed a petty crime and the case was quashed by the judiciary. Unfortunately, a judicial dismissal is not the end of it. Data does not get automatically deleted; the accused has to approach the police for the same.

In the long term, this data harms people in multiple ways. AI and law professor Ifeoma Ajunwa notes that, as in the case of minorities in the US, marginalised communities are likely to be more susceptible to harm because of biased data and preconceived notions. This bias was also evident in job interviews: AI-based recruiting processes, influenced by human managers' biases, did not shortlist CVs if certain key terms  -  such as the name of a prestigious school or college  -  were absent.

Political scientist Partha Chatterjee calls such people "entitled citizens", who have rights but are not recognised as "proper citizens" and live at the mercy of the state, never recognising "legitimate citizenship". Therefore, we need "responsible technologies", with multiple checks as we did in the field of finance by introducing UPI (Unified Payments Interface). Is it possible to scale AI tech the same way in the field of law and order?
