Category: Editorial
Title: Amid AI wars and climate change catastrophes Part Two

Amid AI, wars and climate change catastrophes, diplomacy is acting 'normal'

That is a relief. There are no hegemons. Countries can constrain each other. But they cannot produce collective action. Foreign policy is made under domestic constraints, and so it should often be. Governments are accountable to their citizens, who will care about the price of food, fuel, and employment.

Domestic audiences in big powers also care about their national advantage: Leaders cannot surrender territory, accept defeat without facing domestic consequences, or be seen to concede technological advances to an adversary. The tension between national and global interests is baked into our sense of the normal. Not saving humanity might eventually be a disaster for any country, but trying to save it will often incur a high cost for the leader now.

In normal times, these tensions are part of the fabric of international relations. We live with them, and they can be quite productive. But when the magnitude of the risks has changed considerably, these tensions skirt at the edge of a breaking point, which is where we are now on every issue. In none of the wars that have systemic consequences for the world  -  Russia-Ukraine, America-Iran, Iran-Saudi, Israel and its neighbours  -  is there a bargaining solution within the current frameworks of territory, power and prestige.

In AI, the incentives to accelerate, when driven by the quest for technological advantage, come just at the moment when the technology requires slowing down, regulation and deeper forms of information sharing. Climate negotiations have proved nearly impossible as each state protects its own energy security. Global debt seems an easy solution to economic woes.

We want to continue to act normally when the stakes are no longer normal. The summits will occur. The commitment to dialogue will be announced. The communique will be hailed as a triumph, as it was in the recent BRICS summit. The machinery working gives us a sense of normalcy. But you have to wonder: On a simple measure of significant risks to humanity  -  widespread war, climate change, pandemics, nuclear risks, and now possibly AI  -  is all this activity amounting to making us safer?

Musil's subtle point was not that we are foolish, or ignorant or even depraved. It was rather that we might be rational, a bit too rational in taking our cues from normal times. Our leaders are doing what they are supposed to do: Preserve economic growth, energy security, compete for technological superiority, worry about the next election, and even stage the pageantry of summits.

But conventional rationality and normalcy will not cut it. As in Musil's novel a character says, "The function of diplomacy is to keep what we have." To this, the character Arnheim gives a dark reply, "Keeping what we have leads to war." The focus on Xi and Trump may make us forget just how stuck, and how much at risk, we are. Written by: Pratap Bhanu Mehta The writer is contributing editor, The Indian Express
