Category: Editorial
Title: An impeachment move with no winners Part One

An impeachment move with no winners

The exclusion of even a single eligible voter due to the way the SIR has been conducted would legitimise the criticism of this arbitrary and aggressive exercise Awin-win situation benefits all stakeholders even if a compromise is reached in search of a workable alternative. It could even be a way in which the winning side deludes the losing side to perceive its loss as a necessary price it paid for survival. The impeachment motion of the Opposition parties against the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) is one such example.

It is a motion destined not to carry. Yet its prime movers may not see the loss as a defeat. But can the CEC see their loss as his victory? The move of the Opposition parties is doubtlessly dramatic. However, the question that needs to be pondered by the well-wishers of the Election Commission of India (ECI) is what prompted them to don the gloves for a fight with no chance of victory.

Perhaps, sometimes one fights not to win but to wound the opponent. And the troubling part is that political parties treat the CEC as an opponent. Steadfast defiance The move to impeach the CEC is a first in the history of an institution that is supposed to be a vanguard of Indian electoral democracy.

"India built many institutions after attaining freedom and adopting a Republican constitution…If anyone were to conduct an opinion poll on which of these institutions rendered the best service to Indian democracy with the highest degree of integrity, I have no doubt that the ECI will be our people's first choice," said Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the then Prime Minister at the ECI's golden jubilee celebrations on January 17, 2001. And now, 25 years later, 193 parliamentarians of the Opposition have submitted notices for an impeachment motion against the CEC citing charges of "partisan and discriminatory conduct", "obstruction of investigation into electoral fraud" and disenfranchisement via the Special Intensive Revision (SIR) of electoral rolls. The notice is as unprecedented as the manner in which the revision of electoral rolls has been undertaken despite serious challenge by most political parties, except the ruling dispensation.

Such an alignment of thinking disconcerted the Opposition, which sharpened their attack against the CEC. The repeated press conferences by the Leader of the Opposition (LOP) exposing discrepancies in the electoral rolls of States where elections had been held, further eroded trust in the body. While the aggressive style and severity of the LOP's attack on the poll body, questioning its integrity was surprising, what was more surprising was the poll body's obduracy in not providing a credible response to the doubts raised on its functioning and impartiality.

As the attacks became more and more bitter, communication channels between the poll body and the opposition political parties seemed to choke. The nation had seldom seen such a relentless campaign against a CEC even as the Supreme Court heard endless petitions against his decisions. As the petitions failed to yield any substantive relief, frustration mounted and so did the CEC's apparent indifference.

The CEC persisted with the SIR despite the fortnight-long Vote Adhikar Yatra just before the Bihar State elections. Not that there was no dialogue. The one between the poll body and the Trinamool Congress caused more rancour culminating in the theatrical presence of Mamata Banerjee in the Supreme Court.
