Category: Editorial
Title: An impeachment move with no winners Part Two

An impeachment move with no winners

Never before had a Chief Minister appeared in Court arguing against the ECI's unfair decisions. The dharnas against the SIR in West Bengal or officials dying in the course of conducting the SIR failed to deter the CEC or change his avowed commitment to "purify" the electoral rolls. The ECI invented the "logical discrepancy" tool that pitted electors against the AI used to detect discrepancies.

West Bengal saw 58,20,899 electors deleted at the draft stage and 60,06,675 "under adjudication" in the final list. But the ECI went on to announce elections in the State, where the fate of nearly 10% electors remained undetermined. It employed micro-observers for finalising the revised rolls, something never done in the past.

The SC also took the extraordinary step of appointing over 500 judicial officers to decide the fate of these electors in a short span. It is unusual for a constitutional body mandated with electoral rolls preparation to involve another constitutional body in discharging its routine functions by disregarding the elector's voting right, which it was created to protect. The exclusion of even a single eligible voter due to the way the SIR has been conducted would legitimise the criticism of this arbitrary and aggressive exercise.

A loss for the common man However, does all of this justify the impeachment move? The answer depends on which side of the divide one stands. The crores of voters who figure in the final electoral roll might not protest, treating the tension and trauma during the revision process as part of the routine struggle that helpless citizens go through to secure their rights.

The voice of those excluded doesn't count in the elections in any case. Eventually, the valid concern of protecting the right to vote turns into the lament of losers who are left with no choice but to resort to the ultimate constitutional weapon against the CEC. Meanwhile, the ECI has sounded the poll bugle asking players to contest against each other rather than against the referee.

It is now in full control. The successful completion of the poll process will justify all its decisions. Victors will exult; losers will find reasons to complain. What the nation would be left with will be a poll body in which the Opposition, representing more than half the voting population, has expressed no confidence.

Ashok Lavasa is former Election Commissioner and Union Finance Secretary of India
