Category: Editorial
Title: An Oracle for Indias digital technology Part Two

An Oracle for India's digital technology policy: 30,000 layoffs are a warning India can't ignore

The state-subsidy incentive per apprentice is capped at less than $50 per month. Policymakers often worry that deeper monetary incentives or regulatory concessions for firms that are investing in upskilling will lead to misuse. But good policy design requires distinguishing between opportunistic and genuine behaviour.

To argue that this cannot be done is to concede the limits of governance. The second issue relates to education. India's National Education Policy contains many of the elements needed to foster interdisciplinary learning, a critical component of a resilient workforce. Yet, implementation has prioritised incremental changes to curricula over pedagogical reform.

Just yesterday, the government announced a new "Curriculum on Computational Thinking and AI" for children in grades III  -  VIII. These are useful steps, but they do not address the core question of whether teachers encourage out-of-the-box thinking, provide immersive learning, or are equipped to evaluate students using AI. Simultaneously, the demand for specialised education continues to outpace supply, as is evident from student migration.

In theory, private capital should help bridge this gap. However, political and judicial institutions prefer to treat education as a not-for-profit activity. This virtue signalling has limited the flow of institutional investment into the sector and encouraged the proliferation of elaborate workaround models to extract profit.

India's educational system, therefore, continues to produce large volumes of talent that are increasingly substitutable. AI is not a passing phenomenon. It will evolve through cycles of expansion and contraction. But waiting for the "bubble" to burst is not a sound strategy. Many business leaders who actively use AI express hesitation about expanding hiring in private conversations, particularly at the entry-level, where the demographic dividend is highest.

This, in itself, is a litmus test for assessing the structural impact of AI. We must respond with the exceptional focus and clarity such moments require. Vivan Sharan is a public policy expert and co-founder of Koan Advisory, a New Delhi-based technology policy consulting firm
