Category: Editorial
Title: An Oracle for Indias digital technology Part One

An Oracle for India's digital technology policy: 30,000 layoffs are a warning India can't ignore

Technology policy: 30,000 layoffs are a warning India can't ignore As Big Tech sacrifices thousands of workers to fund an AI arms race, India's "demographic dividend" is hitting a wall of obsolete policy and stagnant domestic demand This week, Oracle laid off approximately 30,000 employees globally, with nearly 12,000 of those layoffs occurring in India. This marks the largest tech layoff in the country this year. The move comes after sustained pressure from Wall Street on the company's stock, driven by its aggressive bets on AI infrastructure.

Between June 2025 and February 2026 alone, Oracle spent $39.2 billion in capital expenditure, against $17.4 billion in operating cash flow, pushing it into negative cash flow  - something markets don't easily forgive. This unfolding story, while firm-specific, deserves analysis through two distinct policy lenses. The first concerns what it reveals about the intensity of the global AI race and its implications for India's industrial policy.

The second examines what the accelerated substitution of labour with capital as a factor of production in the digital age means for social policy. Consider first the AI race. Oracle is investing in AI infrastructure with clear expectations of future demand. It is set to provide a significant portion of the cloud computing backbone to OpenAI, with the two firms recently entering into a landmark agreement worth approximately $300 billion for cloud and compute capacity over a period of roughly five years.

By contrast, in India, domestic players have invested in AI infrastructure without securing comparable long-term commitments. Policymakers have focused largely on the supply side, including subsidies for GPUs and welcome steps such as providing tax certainty for data centres servicing foreign markets. They have paid far less attention to cultivating demand, similar to the push for 5G telecom infrastructure.

Where, then, does demand for AI infrastructure originate? Application-layer companies drive it  -  firms like OpenAI in the US. Yet, in India, policy interventions aimed at the application layer often constrain rather than expand economic activity. Just last week, we saw new rules put out for consultation that would expand government control of online content.

Last year, policymakers abruptly shut down real-money gaming  -  an industry whose surpluses had fuelled a broader ecosystem of tech-intensive game development. India is also considering tighter regulatory oversight for online streaming businesses, heavy end-users of AI. If India chooses not to actively cultivate domestic demand, its industrial policy must at least position the country as a hub for digital services exports.

Policy efforts here are confined to procedural frameworks like tax administration in the case of the zero rating of software exports. This raises more fundamental questions. What would meaningful reform look like for firms exporting digital services? Policymakers could consider hybrid economic zones that can service both foreign and domestic markets, facilitate inward remittances and investments, among other targeted measures.

But such moves will require a shift in policy attention and state capacity from areas such as online content regulation. The second lens is social policy. Here, two practical issues stand out, setting aside the age-old debate on universal basic income in the age of AI. We don't have the fiscal room to provide this as long as 800 million people are on the equivalent of food stamps, public debt markets remain shallow, and states battle with ballooning deficits.

The first is, how do we incentivise industry to invest in workforce upskilling? Firms treat existing apprenticeship and internship frameworks as compliance obligations, rather than as instruments for building a globally competitive workforce. Perhaps rightly so, given that the state has no real skin in the game.
