Category: Editorial
Title: Antitrust delayed is antitrust denied Part Two

Antitrust delayed is antitrust denied

But that decision has proved impossible to unwind, even though Facebook's acquisition of direct competitors in a competitive market should have been a straightforward win for antitrust authorities  -  the very kind of textbook harm the law is designed to prevent. To their credit, the FTC and the Department of Justice under former US President Joe Biden had begun to develop and use their preventive toolkit. They challenged several mergers (including Nvidia-Arm, Illumina-GRAIL, and Microsoft-Activision Blizzard), examined practices in nascent industries such as AI partnerships, and launched early probes into emerging monopolies in the cloud computing and semiconductor markets.

But the pendulum has swung back under Donald Trump's second administration, which has pursued merger settlements, dialled back investigations into AI giants, and revived the myth that tech firms are the guardians of innovation and national security. Political will needed It doesn't have to be this way. US antitrust regulators now have stronger merger guidelines and a clearer understanding of how digital markets work.

What they need is the political will to act early and decisively. The same applies to other governments. The most consequential tech mergers are reviewed simultaneously in multiple jurisdictions, and regulators in the European Union and the UK also have powerful preventive tools, including merger review and market studies.

Even just initiating an investigation can create enough friction and uncertainty for parties to abandon a deal, as happened with Nvidia-Arm and Visa-Plaid. Until recently, the UK Competition and Markets Authority, like the FTC and DOJ in the US, was increasing its scrutiny of tech mergers and partnerships, particularly in the AI sector. But the global scramble to attract AI investment has pushed competition enforcement into retreat.

Amid increasing geopolitical turbulence, regulators are forgetting the hard-earned lessons of the platform era and pulling back precisely when they should be applying those lessons to block anti-competitive AI mergers and prevent the emergence of AI monopolies. The result is a classic collective-action problem, even though all it takes is one courageous competition authority to block a global deal and change the trajectory of an entire market. The Meta decision can seem like much ado about nothing: one case that was too difficult to win despite overwhelming evidence.

But viewed in a broader context, it becomes clear that timing makes all the difference in antitrust enforcement. Regulators must learn to flex their preventive muscle to have any hope of taming Big Tech. By Madhavi Singh The writer is Deputy Director of the Thurman Arnold Project and a resident fellow at the Information Society Project at Yale Law School.
