Category: Editorial
Title: ATMs cash shortages and staircases Part Two

ATMs, cash shortages, and staircases

CATMi is seeking higher compensation from banks. The end result is cash shortage, as there is little incentive for ATMs to continue operations. A related question is, why bother about cash shortage in the times of digital payments? The RBI's research (Impact of UPI on Cash Demand: Evidence from National and Subnational Levels, RBI Bulletin, September 2025) shows that UPI payments have led to lower demand for cash.

On this issue of cash versus digital payments, we should read a recent speech (Central bank policy in an evolving cash landscape, May 2026) by Burkhard Balz, the executive director of Bundesbank, Germany's central bank. In the speech, Balz compares cash to a staircase and digital payments to elevators. In today's world, most people are using elevators rather than stairs to move from one floor to another.

The elevators also look sophisticated from the ground floor. However, in times of emergencies such as earthquakes (and fires as recently seen in Delhi) when elevators become dysfunctional, people have no choice but to exit through the staircase. Likewise, most people are using digital payments instead of cash but in times of emergencies such as Covid-19 they ended up using cash.

So just like a robust and resilient architecture needs both elevators and staircases, a robust and resilient payment system needs both digital payments and cash. The rising risks from geopolitics, geoeconomics, and wars only stresses the importance of having both functional staircases and cash systems to have policy flexibility during these highly uncertain times. The staircase-versus-elevator analogy is really powerful, and one which settles the debate on cash versus digital payments.

In a country like India, where emergencies are a norm, we cannot afford to ignore both cash and staircases. By Amol Agrawal The author, teaches at the National Institute of Securities Markets
