Category: Editorial
Title: Balancing prudence and ambition as old order Part Two

Balancing prudence and ambition as old order gives way to the new

Central capex slowed to 11 per cent in FY25, and if the revised estimates for FY26 are met, central capex growth would have slowed to 4.2 per cent this year. To be sure, authorities budget an 11.5 per cent growth in FY27 but, over a two-year period, this would still suggest a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of less than 8 per cent (nominal) growth. Meanwhile, central PSU capex growth has also averaged 8 per cent over the last three years, undershooting nominal GDP growth.

Finally, state capex growth between April-December 2025  -  the latest data available  -  has grown at a compound annual growth rate of 6 per cent (nominally) over the last two years. So public sector capex  -  as a driver of growth  -  is inevitably slowing, as both fiscal space and absorptive capacity become constraints. The implication: The capex baton will have to progressively  -  and rapidly  -  pass to the private sector.

This is where aggressive and expansive policy reform intent becomes crucial to jump-starting animal spirits among domestic and foreign investors. On its part, the Budget identified seven strategic sectors  -  biopharma, the semiconductor mission, electronic components, rare earths, chemical parks, capital goods and textiles  -  and proposed several measures for each. It also provided a tax holiday for the next two decades to any foreign company that provides cloud services to customers globally by using data center services from India.

Separately, it created a safe harbour for the IT sector to protect it from tax uncertainty, and signalled setting up a high-level banking committee to review the sector. These are all encouraging steps, but reforms are an ongoing process, and the structural ask is long. Policymakers will, therefore, need to be consumed with key questions in the coming months.

How does India jumpstart FDI to shore up capital flows and safely finance India's current account deficit? How does India balance investments in strategic sectors  -  which tend to be much more capital intensive  -  with energising labour-intensive sectors which are key to generating employment and harnessing India's large, and aspirational labour endowment? How does India ensure the raft of the recently-signed Free Trade Agreements  - for which policymakers must be commended  -  move the needle on exports?

The budget made a slew of announcements on customs duties, but will a more overarching simplification and rationalisation of import duties eventually be needed to attract FDI and boost exports in a world of global value chains? What will it take for India's private sector to undertake a broad-based capex cycle in a world floating with Chinese excess capacity? India is currently witnessing a smart cyclical upswing on the back of a raft of supports over the last year (income and GST cuts, monetary and regulatory easing, strong monsoon and low inflation).

But these supports will eventually fade, and we need to plan for the morning after. At that point, it's crucial that cyclical supports are replaced with structurally underpinnings. Sustained policy reform translating into consistently strong growth will be India's best insulation mechanism in the current global storm.

Written by: Sajjid Z. Chinoy The writer is head of Asia Economics at JP Morgan
