Category: Editorial
Title: Balancing prudence and ambition as old order Part One

Balancing prudence and ambition as old order gives way to the new

As old order gives way to the new The Budget identified seven strategic sectors  -  biopharma, the semiconductor mission, electronic components, rare earths, chemical parks, capital goods and textiles  -  and proposed several measures for each The Budget was presented against an extraordinary global backdrop. A rules-based (albeit imperfect) global order is rapidly unravelling. This has near-term uncertainties and medium-term concerns.

Near-term uncertainties because as the rules of the game are suddenly, and arbitrarily, rewritten, markets are getting whiplashed almost every day. Which country will be the victim of the next set of tariffs? Is there any risk-free asset left in the world? Will muscular industrial policy in developed economies successfully jawbone global capital back?

Medium-term concerns because the political and economic balkanisation that this will inevitably engender is inimical to specialisation and exchange that underpinned the last 80 years of prosperity, notwithstanding the accompanying warts of heightened inequality and unsustainable imbalances. Generating growth in a splintered and cleavaged world will be hard. So how should economies respond to these impulses?

Heightened near-term uncertainty would argue for hunkering down: To build buffers and be fiscally and monetarily conservative. But a more bleak medium-term global growth outlook would argue for the opposite  -  be more adventurous and expansive to avoid getting dragged down into mediocrity. This is especially so because economic heft is the key to geopolitical leverage in this brave new world.

This, then, was the tension confronting this year's budget. To be conservative and aggressive at the same time. One way to achieve this division of labour was to be conservative on the fiscal math but more expansive and adventurous on policy reforms. The first task was achieved. Despite direct and indirect tax cuts, and a lower-than-expected nominal GD, policymakers met this year's fiscal deficit target of 4.4 per cent of GDP and signaled a modest consolidation towards 4.3 per cent of GDP next year.

Furthermore, the fiscal assumptions going forward are relatively conservative such that consolidation does not seem in any threat. The first box was checked, but medium-term fiscal sustainability involves many more moving parts: It depends crucially on how growth pans out and whether state finances can be reined in. If nominal GDP growth averages 10 per cent over the next five years, the Centre will have to reduce its deficit further to about 3.6 per cent of GDP over four years to meet its debt target of 50 per cent of GDP by FY31.

But unless state deficits are reined in, debt will continue to grow. Combined public debt  -  which is what matters for the economy  -  will barely move from 82 per cent to 79 per cent of GDP by 2031. Things get more hairy if nominal GDP growth slips to 9 per cent, eminently possible in a world with growing Chinese excess capacity creating disinflationary pressures across Asia.

The Centre will have to reduce its deficit to 3 per cent of GDP by FY31, and this is keeping in mind that the Eighth Pay Commission is expected to kick in from FY28. Furthermore, if state deficits remain at current levels, public debt to GDP will barely move in the next five years. So, despite the progress made in recent years, the economy has its fiscal work cut out.

This will inevitably curb the quantum of support the fiscal can keep providing to the economy. First signs of this are already visible. Public capex was a key driver of the post-pandemic recovery, with central capex growing 30 per cent annually (in nominal terms) for the first four years. Things have inevitably slowed.
