Category: Editorial
Title: Behind the XiModi thaw a larger USChina game Part Two

Behind the Xi-Modi thaw, a larger US-China game

The statement underlines the need for India to commit to a "dual-track" of advancing ties in other areas and on border issues in parallel. This is a position that India has eventually come around to following the announcement of completion of the disengagement of troops in 2024, but the Chinese clearly want more  -  or more accurately, less Indian insistence on border issues. What "interference" is, is left undefined, allowing for any number of issues that can be raised to pressure India later.

China also expects India to "effectively improve the public opinion base of bilateral relations", indicating as it has done frequently in recent years that critics of Chinese policies and those sceptical of the current India-China détente need to be muzzled for the sake of "positive energy" in the relationship. The Chinese have also tried to exert pressure by explicitly referring to India's "policies and positions on Taiwan and Tibet"  - references absent in the Indian statement. Fourth, China takes out insurance when it says that the view of both nations as "partners rather than adversaries… is a strategic judgment based on the stage of development and the international environment of the two countries".

This position is a giveaway of Chinese thinking  -  in domestic politics as well as in external policies, Beijing has regularly changed course depending on these factors. Today, those circumstances  -  a difficult domestic economic situation and more significantly, the run-up to the 21st National Congress of the CPC a year from now  -  require stability in ties with India and the US, while also keeping the two apart through such mechanisms as BRICS. When domestic and international circumstances change, China will be back to its more familiar avatar.

Written by: Jabin T Jacob The writer is professor, Department of International Relations and Governance Studies, and director, Centre of Excellence for Himalayan Studies, Shiv Nadar University, Delhi NCR
