Category: Editorial
Title: Best of Both Sides Surjit Bhalla writes On Part One

Best of Both Sides | Surjit Bhalla writes: On economy, India's leaders are in a comfort zone  -  they need a jolt

Best of Both Sides |On economy, India's leaders are in a comfort zone  -  they need a jolt The leaders are stuck in a deep comfort zone, reminiscent of Nehru's luxury position post-independence. Or at the beginning of UPA-II, post an impressive first UPA term. Comfort kills the hunger for risk and change and perpetuates the stranglehold of the Deep State, that is, senior IAS officials managing the economy at the direction of the oligarchs.

Look at FDI for clues about the angst. Unless policies change, the promise of Viksit Bharat is likely to go the way of the unexpected 2024 political loss Almost) all headline news about the Indian economy is superlative  -  GDP growth above 7.4 per cent for the last three years, inflation at an all-time low, manufacturing growth above 8 per cent. Add to this the fact that politically, the BJP has never been in a more comfortable position.

The 2024 miss of a majority is a distant memory. India and the BJP are in a stable position. The political opposition is an insult to the meaning of opposition  -  it is rudderless, leaderless and energy-less. Until that changes, the BJP will likely not want to risk reforms. And that's the problem. The leaders are stuck in a comfort zone, reminiscent of Jawaharlal Nehru's luxury position post-Independence.

Or the beginning of UPA-II, post an impressive first UPA term. Comfort kills the hunger for risk, and perpetuates the stranglehold of the Deep State, that is, senior IAS officials managing the economy at the directions of the oligarchs. Look at FDI for clues about the angst. Unless policies change, the promise of Viksit Bharat is likely to go the way of the unexpected 2024 political loss.

We boast about the fastest-growing major economy in the world; about the whole world waiting to enter our markets. We dream about India being the fourth-largest economy. We are not there yet, and if California were a nation, we would have to have a higher GDP than its. At present, the GDP of California is $4.1 trillion; India will likely be marginally ahead of Japan in 2025, but behind California!

In other words, nobody (except our policymakers) seems to be enamoured of the size of the Indian market. Even Indians are not in awe of the "large" and inviting Indian market. There is one constant about GDP determinants  -  investment. Closely associated with increasing investment is the necessity of increasing FDI.

This is the other growth constant  -  FDI is critically important, especially for countries like India, because apart from investment, it brings in much-needed technology. In 2024, net FDI in India reached a record low of 0.09 per cent of GDP. No typo there; we received $27.6 billion in 2024 and $24 billion flew out of India  -  the largest ever.

The previous "high" was $19 billion at the height of the 2008 financial crisis. As far back as 1972, Professor Harberger reminded his students that money that comes in is "goood"; money that goes out is "baaad". A pity this home-truth is not obvious to our self-reliant policy-makers. Investor sentiment is also at a low.

Stock-market returns are only 3 per cent in USD terms, and sliding. The rupee has just crossed 90, and is a major depressant ahead of the important RBI policy announcement today. At a nominal rate of 5.5 per cent, the real repo rate is upwards of 3.5 per cent  -  close to the highest ever observed in India.
