Category: Editorial
Title: Better health care alone cannot overcome Part One

Better health care alone cannot overcome India's nutrition challenges

India's nutrition challenges The recently released National Family Health Survey (NFHS)-6 report presents a mixed progress card for India, offering reasons to cheer while also sending clear signals to pause and reflect. On the bright side, stunting levels (for children under five), which indicate long periods of sub-optimal food intake with other deprivations, have declined from 35.5% to 29.3%. Though a modest decline, any gain is welcome given the complexity of the task that involves strengthening women's access to knowledge and resources, improved water and sanitation, and ensuring access to healthy affordable diets.

Wasting levels that indicate whether children have adequate weight for their height, show no change, except for severe forms of wasting. The pattern across indicators makes one thing clear: gains in child nutrition are due to better health-care access, immunisation coverage, maternal education and improvements in housing, water and sanitation, while feeding practices and access to quality diets remain weak and continue to limit progress. Institutional births have reached 90%, with public health facilities accounting for 58% of births; 91% of deliveries were attended by skilled medical personnel and 95% of mothers were visited at least once by health personnel during the antenatal period.

Equally gratifying is vaccination coverage for children  -  87% of children between 12 and 23 months of age are now fully vaccinated. Since private facilities account for only about 3% of vaccinations, the high coverage reflects the strong outreach efforts of frontline workers  -  Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA), Anganwadi workers (AWW), and Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANM). These national averages hide regional disparities, but access to health services has improved across States.

Poor feeding practices Despite the high rate of institutional births, only about 50% of newborns are breastfed within the first hour of life, indicating that the health system must intensify efforts to support early initiation of breastfeeding. About 60% of children between the ages of six to eight months, receive solid/semi-solid food, while only 15% between six to 23 months receive an adequate diet. Improving the timely initiation of complementary feeding and ensuring that all children receive an adequate diet are key to reducing undernutrition.

In India, complementary feeding is closely linked to the annaprasana ritual, typically performed between six and 12 months  -  any delay will result in growth faltering. A growing and under-explored determinant of child nutrition in India is maternal time poverty. Women perform multiple roles within and outside the home.

NFHS-6 reports that about 30% of women engaged in paid work during the past 12 months, but this significantly underestimates their overall work burden. A large proportion of women in informal economies engage in unpaid family labour, in farming/fisheries, livestock care, and domestic chores. There are no clear estimates of the percentage of young mothers with children between six-23 months who are in the work force and there is very little documentation on how women manage child feeding with their other work roles.

In many rural areas, in the absence of crèches, women leave their infants and young children with older family members or the child's older sibling (usually a girl), impacting both breastfeeding and complementary feeding, when they are out in the fields. The processed food trap Recent consumer expenditure survey results show that households are spending less on cereals and more on dairy, processed foods and beverages, with the latter two forming a large part of the expenditure. This creates an impression of diversity which is not the same as nutritional adequacy.
