Category: Editorial
Title: Biopharma strategy needs regulatory focus Part Two

Biopharma strategy needs regulatory focus

It also suggests clinical trials would be waived off when sufficient evidence of biosimilarity exists, but what is sufficient evidence is left to the regulator's discretion. The proposed regulation must be formalised early, incorporating the scientific principles behind regulatory innovations in leading regimes and minimising regulatory discretion for a more predictable and efficient approval process. Two, streamlining the implementation of clinical trial regulation.

Regulations concerning clinical trials, which account for about 40% of the pharma R&D budget and take three-six years, require an overhaul in their implementation. The New Drugs and Clinical Trial Rules, 2019, were introduced with the objective of addressing malpractices in clinical trials in India. However, some critical lacunae in implementation have been pointed out, including lack of coordination among the three-tier committee system, ultimately resulting in India losing its appeal for clinical trials.

India's share in clinical trials has fallen from 11% in 2019 to 3% in 2025. Some of the leading innovative pharma firms have shifted their clinical trials out of India for reasons that include concerns over the implementation of regulations. Three, integrating AI into clinical trials. AI has increasingly been used in drug discovery and development, including the clinical trials phase.

Patient data is critical for developing AI models required for the pharma industry. Access to this data will also make clinical trials smoother, especially in identifying the right individuals. The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, mandates anonymisation of personal health data, a necessary step for privacy protection but one that adds short-term costs.

Although India generates vast quantities of health-related data, much of it remains siloed and inaccessible, limiting its utility for AI-driven drug discovery and development. The Budget has identified biopharma as one of the strategic sectors and laid down a strategy for its transformation. There are a few areas of regulations that require the immediate attention of policymakers to make the strategy work well.

By Reji K Joseph, Faculty member at Institute for Studies in Industrial Development, New Delhi
