Category: Editorial
Title: Biopharma strategy needs regulatory focus Part One

Biopharma strategy needs regulatory focus

Policymakers must turn attention to comparative efficacy data and animal testing requirement waiver, easing enforcement of clinical trial regulation, and integrating AI into clinical trials In Budget 2026, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced a plan to scale up manufacturing in seven strategic and frontier sectors, including biopharmaceuticals. The "Strategy for Healthcare Advancement through Knowledge, Technology and Innovation" in biopharma (Biopharma SHAKTI) has an allocation of `10,000 crore over the next five years to build the ecosystem for domestic production of biologics and biosimilars. The strategy has three components - establishing three National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research focused on biopharma; strengthening the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), the nodal agency overseeing regulations related to medicines, to meet global standards and approval timeframes; and creating a network of over 1,000 accredited clinical trial sites in India.

The strategy assumes great significance when biopharma (large molecule drugs) is gaining market share at an accelerated pace. In the global market, the share of biologics increased from 31% in 2018 to 42% in 2023 and is projected to outpace small molecule drugs (chemical-based drugs) by 2027. As biopharma products provide effective treatment for complex diseases like cancer, besides autoimmune diseases and rare genetic conditions, building up a sound production ecosystem in India is critical for its public health security and for taking advantage of emerging opportunities in the global market.

As regulations play an important role in the growth of this sector, the Budget aptly includes the CDSCO as one of the components of the strategy. There are three areas of regulations where the immediate attention of policymakers is required. One, waiving off the comparative efficacy data and animal testing requirements.

Compared to generic medicines, biosimilars require substantially more data for market approval. While generics are approved based on pharma equivalence and bioequivalence data, biosimilars follow a totality-of-evidence approach requiring comparative analytical data involving pre-clinical and clinical studies to establish similarity with the reference biologic. This makes developing biosimilar costlier and more time-consuming, resulting in much higher prices.

According to data published by the Generics and Biosimilars Initiative, while approval of generics costs $2-5 million, takes two-three years and involves 20-50 patients, biosimilar approval takes $100-200 million, eight-10 years, and 500 patients. Now with the emergence of advanced analytical technologies, leading regulatory regimes such as the European Medicines Agency, US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), and Health Canada are waiving off many of these data generation requirements, making biosimilar development more competitive. In 2023, Health Canada approved Samsung Bioepis's biosimilar Pyzchiva without requiring comparative efficacy data.

Countries are also doing away with animal study requirements as there are alternatives such as AI-based computational models to generate such data. Last year, the USFDA issued a draft guideline stating comparative efficacy studies may not be required for biosimilar nod. It has also announced plans to do away with animal study requirements.

The CDSCO is gradually moving in this direction. It issued a draft guideline in May 2025 to invite comments on a proposal to waive off much of the data requirement for approval of biosimilars. It is a progressive step, but the draft guideline has drawbacks. It does not seem to have fully aligned with the latest advances in technology and regulations as it has not fully waived off animal testing requirements.
