Category: Editorial
Title: Bridging funding gaps for sustainable farming

Bridging funding gaps for sustainable farming

Globally, adaptation funding is falling short. India must strengthen its domestic sources, especially from the private sector India needs to prioritise financing for resilience in agricultural food production system, not only to ensure country's future food security but also to protect the livelihoods of predominant small farmers. With growing number of recurring extreme weather events, India ranked as the ninth most affected country from climate change as per the Climate Risk Index 2026 published by Germanwatch in November 2025.

Broadly speaking, it is important to note the growing gap between the required and actual finance for adaptation from international public finance flows. According to the latest Adaptation Gap Report 2025 by UNEP, the requirement of adaptation finance by developing countries like India is estimated at $310- 365 billion annually by 2035, 12-14 times higher than the actual flow of funds at $26 billion per year. Under such a scenario, India needs to strengthen the domestic climate finance ecosystem for for ensuring future food security and livelihoods of farmers.

Globally, adaptation fund mobilisation has slowed significantly, becoming a cause for concern. However, it is heartening that there were considerable efforts during COP30 in Belem, Brazil, particularly towards promoting adaptation in agriculture. The agri-food system receives only about 20 per cent of total adaptation funds against the requirement of about 54 per cent, according to the 'Agrifood Systems in National Adaptation Plans  -  An analysis' report, published by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in November 2025.

New platform In view of this, India along with 13 other developing countries agreed at COP30 to launch a new country platform that can become an operational vehicle for NAP with the support of Green Climate Fund (GCF). The platform is being planned to serve as unified mechanism connecting domestic public finance, private investment, and international climate funds. In India, while there is no comprehensive estimate available on the status of domestic climate finance flows for adaptation in agriculture sector, a partially tracked estimate by the Climate Policy Initiative (CPI) puts it at around ₹265 billion, ($3.6 billion) accounting for only about 24 per cent of total funds for adaptation, at ₹1,092 billion, in 2021-22.

The estimate tracked on-farm agricultural adaptation activities including agroforestry, crop insurance, efficient irrigation, research and capacity building, resilient cropping system and soil and water conservation. Nevertheless,financing adaptation of agriculture in India also stood substantially lower than the required amount of $67 billion annually from 2015 to 2030. Some of the major reasons for the substantial gap in financing for adaptation in agriculture are dismal participation from private sector sources and limited flow of international public finances.

Public sector sources of funds, primarily from Central and State government budgets, accounted for 98-99 per cent, while private funding, at about ₹2.7 billion, accounted for only about 1 per cent of total domestic finance for adaptation in agriculture. Poor participation from the private sector is mainly due to inherent investment risks in agriculture, with increased frequency of extreme weather events, long gestation periods for returns, difficulties in defining clear business cases. Moreover, over 80 per cent of the end-users of technological innovations from such investments are smallholder farmers.

Their small and fragmented landholdings limit the feasibility to achieve economies of scale, thereby discouraging large scale investments from the private sector. Under such a situation, public finances must continue to take precedence over private finances. The private sector must, however, be encouraged to invest with suitable financial strategies and instruments such as blended finance, public-private partnerships, schemes with minimal assured return, etc.

Further, it is essential to build well-functioning, efficiently regulated and transparent domestic climate finance ecosystem for seamless flow of funds, creating comprehensive knowledge and data for climate risk assessment. By A Amarender Reddy & Tulsi Lingareddy Reddy is Joint Director, Policy Support Research, ICAR-National Institute of Biotic Stress Management, Raipur, and Lingareddy is Senior Economist, Sustainable Finance and Agriculture, Mumbai. Views are personal
