Category: Editorial
Title: Bringing financial reforms to the fore Part One

Bringing financial reforms to the fore

The legal and regulatory fog over digital assets must be lifted soon. Ease of biz and legal reforms must also be given priority These are days of challenging global and domestic uncertainties. Global uncertainties are mainly associated with geopolitics of war, conflicts, and power playing out through an unpredictable imposition of tariffs.

Importantly, the rates that vary country by country and goods-categories impact domestic sentiments and expectations on the road ahead. Domestic uncertainties arise as much from delays in policy interventions as from supply and demand-side factors. How does one then safeguard one's wealth and balance asset holdings at such a time?

An ordinary investor invests her surplus income in various assets and tries to optimize the combination of risks (R1), returns (R2) and ready liquidity (R3). Given the uncertainties, investors also add criteria such as the unknown anticipation of the economic policy frame, political stability, social cohesion and business/investment opportunities both at home and abroad. Asset class Among the class of financial assets, cash, deposits, shares, government securities, pension funds, insurance and mutual funds are most understood.

The new financial assets are digital and in some senses they are abstract. They now attract a number of economic entities, including trust funds and are on the radar of opinion makers and influencers. NGOs, temples, churches and mosques may also increasingly enter the market for digital assets and stock markets with demat accounts.

The question is whether digital assets and stock markets gain at the expense of bank deposits or deposits with corporates or non-bank financial intermediaries. There is no definitive answer to this question. However, intuitively speaking, the upward shift in the valuation of digital assets and stock markets will be a consideration for most asset holders and a part of such heightened valuations may also get back to deposits after a short time lag.

Digital dilemma In the absence of any regulation or official pronouncements on digital assets, a rise in issuance of rupee-based digital coins like the US dollar based 'stable' coins may not be ruled out, particularly that there is now interest in official circles in internationalization of the Indian rupee. If this happens, will there be international settlement of claims of such 'stable' digital coins issued in different countries under the aegis of an international payment and settlement infrastructure? If the answer is positive, then why not make a clear official statement about the state of the digital assets with particular reference to cryptos and CBDCs (Central Bank Digital Currencies) and 'stable' coins and other derivatives thereof?

The last monetary policy statement missed the opportunity to handle this matter. And the fiscal authorities have also not done enough to dispel the uncertainty about digital assets. Budget imperatives Perhaps the Budget for 2026-27 will be used to deal with this issue as also other structural reforms relating to banking and financial sector and credit flows, where the RBI has announced a significant package of measures in October 2025.

One hopes the Reserve Bank will also come soon with the findings of its internal research on regulatory overreach in matters relating to bank competitiveness and credit flows. It is only then that the credibility of the monetary policy statement of October 1, 2025, will be secured. RBI must take lead The tempo provided by the October statement of the Reserve Bank needs to be maintained by fiscal authorities as well.
