Category: Editorial
Title: Budget must keep the growth momentum Part One

Budget 2026-27 must keep the growth momentum

The steps to take must include strengthening the domestic levers of growth, policy certainty and sorting out structural bottlenecks India faced global headwinds in 2025 but belied fears that America's 50% tariffs would hurt its economy. The resilience of the Indian economy had a lot to do with the government's reformist measures. As Prime Minister Narendra Modi said recently, "2025 will be remembered as a year when India treated reforms as a continuous national mission." Budget 2026-27 can give a fillip to the mission.

India needs to strengthen the domestic levers of growth. This can be done by prioritising growth-enhancing productive capital expenditure and social sector spending, while maintaining the current fiscal consolidation glide path and keeping debt risks contained. Continue the focus on defence First, the government should continue the focus on defence, with higher expenditure on the capex.

The share of capital outlay in defence should be enhanced to 30% from the budgetary estimate for 2025-26 of 26.4%. The budgetary allocation for the Defence Research and Development Organisation should also be increased by at least ₹10,000 crore. Defence industrial corridors in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have made strides in promoting defence indigenisation and raising defence production.

The government should consider establishing an eastern India defence industrial corridor. Second, private enterprises have played a key role in augmenting defence exports in recent times, contributing nearly 65% of total defence exports in 2024-25. There can be a further boost by setting up a defence export promotion council for enhanced coordination with armed services, their foreign directorates, defence public sector undertakings, private manufacturers, the Ministry of External Affairs, Indian embassies, the Ministry of Defence, and communicate with foreign governments and buyers.

This will also help achieve the target of defence exports set at ₹50,000 crore by 2028-29. Third, a transition toward clean energy, advanced manufacturing, electric mobility, semiconductors and strategic technologies is driving a demand for critical minerals. The National Critical Mineral Mission (NCMM), approved in early 2025 provides a strong strategic foundation to secure these materials.

This can be supplemented by a dedicated critical minerals tailings recovery programme under the NCMM, with the purpose of treating tailings recovery. The government should also consider offering dedicated financing for this. Fourth, exports need a significant policy thrust in the current global environment.

The present budgetary allocation for the Remission of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products Scheme, at around ₹18,233 crore needs to be raised significantly to make the exports more competitive. Fifth, India has emerged as the world's leading hub for Global Capability Centres, but its transfer pricing (TP) framework has yet to evolve. The government may consider issuing clear guidance on acceptable TP models for different categories.

Sixth, to accelerate drone adoption, global competitiveness, and exports, the government should consider catalysing scale through targeted financial support, including enhancing the production linked incentive outlay from ₹120 crore to ₹1,000 crore and setting up a ₹1,000 crore drone research and development fund. Finance credit and tax disputes Seventh, deepening the corporate bond markets is critical for diversification of finance credit beyond the banking system. The government could consider lowering the qualifying borrowing threshold and include listed and unlisted corporates to widen the issuer base and stimulate bond supply, encourage large corporations to diversify borrowings through market issuances, increase investment caps for insurance companies beyond the current 25% limit and revise the 'Approved Investment' threshold from AA to AA-, enabling prudent allocation into high-quality but lower-rated issuers.
