Category: Editorial
Title: Budget will foster competitiveness Part Two

Budget will foster competitiveness

Innovative liquidity measures  -  mandating TReDS for Central Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE) procurement settlements, extending Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)-backed credit guarantees for invoice discounting, and linking Government e-Marketplace (GeM) with TReDS for information sharing  -  are expected to ease working capital constraints for MSMEs. Coupled with professional support through 'cooperative mitras' in Tier-II and Tier-III towns, these steps can strengthen MSMEs, deepen value-chain linkages, and enhance income, employment and wealth creation at scale. Scaling up and modernising livestock enterprises, alongside promoting farmer producer organisations in animal husbandry and dairying is a strategic move to strengthen community-led entrepreneurship and expand rural and peri-urban employment.

Targeting high value crops viz. coconut, sandalwood, cocoa, cashew and nuts will further encourage local investment, build enterprises at grassroots, enhance productivity and diversification, increase farmers' incomes and create new employment pathways. The proposal to set up five university townships along major industrial and logistics corridors can significantly bridge skill gaps by fostering closer collaboration between industry, academia and policymakers.

Such an ecosystem would enable technology-driven skill development while simultaneously reinforcing industrial growth, assuring business competitiveness and advancing India's journey towards Viksit Bharat vision by 2047. Further, the Budget reinforces the government's focus on revitalising the cooperative sector by easing tax pressures and encouraging member-centric surplus sharing. It also facilitated policy support that recognises cooperatives as vital instruments of inclusive and community-led growth.

The Budget attempts to re-energise industry and manufacturing as pillars of economic transformation. By aligning policy intervention with the Make-in-India vision and the long-term goal of Viksit Bharat 2047, the Budget seeks to create feasible and inclusive growth pathways. The emphasis on MSMEs and rural development as growth engines underscored a people-centric approach  -  one that can convert aspiration into action and build a resilient, self-sustaining inclusive economy while ensuring that the benefits of development are widely and equitably shared.

By S Mahendra Dev & KK Tripathy Dev is Chairman and Tripathy is Joint Secretary in the Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister. Views are personal
