Category: Editorial
Title: Budget must keep the growth momentum Part Two

Budget 2026-27 must keep the growth momentum

It could also permit provident funds to invest in non-convertible debentures issued by infrastructure investment trusts and real estate investment trusts, enabling long-term capital to support infrastructure aggregation vehicles. Eighth, measures to address disputes pendency need to be prioritised. The first appellate level in direct tax disputes, the office of the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) or CIT(A), is facing severe pendency.

There is a need to prioritise high-pitched assessments, cases with complete submissions, cases covered by jurisdictional High Court or Supreme Court rulings, appeals older than five years, and matters that are chronologically the oldest. The need is a dual-track disposal system: a fast-track for simple or low-value matters and a detailed track for complex or high-value matters. Also, around 40% vacancies at the CIT(A) level need to be filled.

Ninth, newly incorporated companies (even for new companies formed by established Authorised Economic Operator or AEO-accredited groups) are ineligible for certification by the AEO. Removing this restriction for AEO-accredited groups will help enhance trade efficiency and facilitate greater trade. Tenth, the reforms related to customs tariffs introduced in the last Budget must continue.

Further reduction in the customs tariffs slabs can help streamline the duty structure, address the issue of inverted duties and benefit trade. Import duties should be calibrated across the value chain to support domestic manufacturing competitiveness and address the inverted duties. Ensure competitiveness Budget 2026-27 must focus on sustaining India's growth momentum by deepening competitiveness across sectors and strengthening the domestic engines of expansion.

By combining fiscal prudence with unlocking growth potential across industries, ensuring policy certainty and addressing structural bottlenecks, the Budget can crowd in private investment and enhance India's global competitiveness. Jyoti Vij is Director General, Fed
