Category: Editorial
Title: Busting the myth about RBI interventions Part Two

Busting the myth about RBI interventions

Therefore, India's forex reserves as at the close of the day will become 667 billion dollars, resulting in a depletion of $3 billion reserves. An important point to grasp is that dollar/rupee speculative trade within the Indian forex market during the day does not deplete the forex reserves of India. Participating banks lose or gain rupees, not dollars.

The upshot of the hypothetical example is that with the forex market in India loaded with 10 billion extra dollars during the day (RBI's intervention), the dollar/rupee market is bound to drop (rupee gaining) with excess artificial supply of dollars. How much the market actually drops during the day will depend upon demand and supply of dollars within the Indian forex market; it will also depend on the risk-bearing capacity of the bank's forex trader. These have nothing to do with the international forex market.

Herein lies the source of a rampant misconception. The dollar/rupee market rate may, in the hypothetical example as considered, move from Rs.94.70 to Rs.93.50 per dollar during the course of the day. The entire world, India included, would then think, grossly erroneously, that RBI has burnt $3 billion to defend the rupee.

Rupee has been defended no doubt, but the $3 billion outgo from India has zero connection with RBI's intervention. Those dollars would have gone out anyway. They arise out of either import licenses granted by the Commerce Ministry or the outward remittance licenses granted by RBI. So, RBI's intervention, by itself to defend the rupee, does not, and cannot, deplete forex reserves of India.

India's forex regulations continue to be impregnable; and the RBI monitors and enforces them strictly. May the RBI keep intervening in India's forex market in India's overall economic interest. May the rupee stabilise and gain gradually. By BISHWAJIT BHATTACHARYYA (The writer is a Senior Advocate, Supreme Court of India, and former Additional Solicitor-General of India who worked as a forex trader with both a PSU bank as well as a foreign bank.)
