Category: Editorial
Title: By standing up for stray animals India can Part One

By standing up for stray animals, India can show the world a better way

India can show the world a better way The Supreme Court's motivation to balance public safety and animal welfare cannot be faulted. The pathway to hell, however, is often paved with good intentions, and we point to three serious risks that could follow from the rulings The Supreme Court (SC) is the ultimate protector of our Constitution and the values that make us who we are. The Court's decisions matter for all who live in its jurisdiction, and also internationally as India's power rises.

If, and how, politicians, judges, journalists, and people of the land transform their development story into a unique, home-grown experience of trans-species coexistence, it will serve as an exemplar for other countries too. India is already leading the way on this. The choice of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam (meaning that the entire earth  -  with all its human and more-than-human beings  -  forms one family) as the theme of its G20 Presidency was a pioneering move, highlighting the importance of planetary rights.

This is why the SC's suo moto writs with reference to stray animals matter more than ever. The SC's motivation to balance public safety and animal welfare cannot be faulted. Accidents that result in suffering and fatal harm to both humans and strays should worry all of us, as should the reputational costs to the country.

The pathway to hell, however, is often paved with good intentions, and we point to three serious risks that could follow from the rulings. Even as the bench takes up the issue again, we hope this article will serve as a useful backgrounder for further deliberations. First, the SC's judgments make reference to a newspaper article's headline, 'City hounded by strays, kids pay the price'.

Unfortunately, irrespective of the veracity of the reporting in this or other similar articles, such headlines tend to be misleading in the false binaries they create. As a polarising narrative gets picked up, crucial details get forgotten or are deliberately ignored. For instance, "kids pay the price" is, in fact, not a consequence of a city being "hounded" by strays; rather, fatalities and serious injuries occur because of the systemic failure of vaccination and sterilisation programmes.

Such headlines also miss out on the other side of the story, which the defendants cannot utter because they are  -  literally  -  voiceless. Think of the countless acts of violence that are committed against animals, for which the penalty still remains a meagre Rs 50; reflect further on the "attacks" that come from animals trying desperately to defend themselves against brutal "teasing" and worse, and for whom there is scarcely a protective umbrella of the law. In other words, reality is messier than headlines capture (especially of negative stories).

The SC's decision to use such a polarising headline as its "hook" risks exacerbating hate and violence against strays. Second, as the rulings rightly note, the apparent conflict between humans and animals has arisen due to gross negligence and failure on the part of the authorities to implement ABC rules. What is needed is stringent action against municipal authorities that failed to do their statutory duty for over 20 years.

But to now penalise stray animals for human failure, through incarceration and worse, is not justice. It is worth highlighting that stray dogs are territorial animals, often closely attached to their human feeders and friends. Relocating dogs from diverse spaces in small cages will result in grievous injuries; those that do not die of physical trauma will likely die of broken hearts.
