Category: Editorial
Title: By standing up for stray animals India can Part Two

By standing up for stray animals, India can show the world a better way

This is the opposite of the ideals embodied in Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam. Third, it is to the credit of the Court that it reconsiders some of its positions. For instance, the ruling of August 22, 2025, recognised aspects of the previous writ as too harsh and offered constructive clarifications. The problem, however, is that even if the Court reconsiders and re-pronounces, public narratives  - especially involving "othering" such as referring to strays as a "menace"  -  are difficult to reverse.

The Overton Window shifts, and animal-haters feel legitimised in taking vigilante actions against the voiceless. Some of the hate could be curbed if the SC were to issue firm rules  -  in the same writs  -  against the abuse of animals by residents' associations, and also hold governmental bodies to account (for instance, "shelters" where there have been some horrifying cases of neglect and abuse of the beings they were supposed to protect). A stay order on municipal corporations against the relocation of animals, until a solution that is "humane" for both humans and more-than-humans is found, would also help in reducing knee-jerk actions with irreversible consequences (for example, deaths of animals; the risk of fatal bites being suffered by the handlers of severely traumatised dogs crammed in small, alien spaces).

Finally, lest it be thought that a humane solution is utopian, we stress that this is not the case. The Netherlands is the first country to have eliminated stray dogs, not by cruel methods of impounding and killing, but through strict implementation of animal welfare laws, encouragement of stray adoptions, and bans on puppy farms. Indeed, the Netherlands put in place a CSVR policy similar to ours  -  theirs is called Collect (kinder than our use of "Capture"), Neuter, Vaccinate, Return  -  but their authorities actually implemented the policy, whereas ours did not.

Our neighbour, Bhutan, has become the first country in the world to have 100 per cent sterilisation and vaccination of its stray dogs. If others can do this, so can we. And indeed, so should we. For this is the country whose Constitution upholds compassion for all living creatures, and whose culture regards the dignity of all animals as sacred.

The Supreme Court has repeatedly stated, since 1974, that the right to life or Article 21 of the Constitution is not limited to "mere animal existence". We need to update our lexicon and get rid of the expression "animal existence"; instead, we should embrace the idea that human beings and animals alike have the right to a dignified life. Madan Lokur is a former judge of the Supreme Courts of India and Fiji, and is serving as Chairperson, United Nations Internal Justice Council.

Amrita Narlikar is Honorary Fellow of Darwin College, University of Cambridge, and Distinguished Fellow at the Australia-India Institute at the University of Melbourne
