Category: Editorial
Title: CBSE curriculum will enable students to Part Four

CBSE curriculum will enable students to understand the AI 'black box'

Forces were responsible for the My Lai massacre in Vietnam. Similarly, on April 6, as the crew of the NASA Artemis II mission swung around the moon in their spacecraft, they photographed the earth rising above the lunar limb  -  an earthset  -  only months after the first casualty of coordinated strikes by the U.S. and Israel against Iran was a girls' primary school.

The Refugees International president called it "likely the largest number of child casualties in a single U.S. military attack" since My Lai. In Washington, the administration was simultaneously dismantling legal protections for immigrants, imposing tariffs which fall afoul of trade law, and enabling an Israeli military campaign in Gaza that the International Court of Justice has been scrutinising for genocide since January 2024.

Thus, the country that asks the world to celebrate humankind's return to the moon has demonstrated a simultaneous contempt for human rights and international law. Disregard for law, due process The International Commission of Jurists and the Red Cross have found that U.S. and Israeli forces have struck multiple sites protected by international humanitarian law.

Before the assault, the Pentagon had dismantled the Civilian Protection Center of Excellence and shelved a framework to avoid civilian harm, among other measures. In 2025, a UN commission confirmed that Israel was responsible for the ongoing genocide in Gaza, and the International Criminal Court issued arrest warrants for Israel's prime minister and former defence minister for war crimes. However, the U.S.

continued to supply arms to Israel and responded to the warrants with sanctions against officials. The Trump administration has also invoked the International Emergency Economic Powers Act in an unusual way to impose sweeping tariffs. While the World Trade Institute found the move violated the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, there could be no relief as the U.S.

has been blocking new appointments to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) Appellate Body since 2019. Affected countries could file complaints and the U.S. could appeal, but the appeals would languish with a body that had been hollowed out. Additionally, the U.S. administration has deported Venezuelan migrants, many with no gang affiliation, to notorious prisons  -  a process that the U.S.

Supreme Court said violated due process rights. Independent estimates indicate that in Mr. Trump's second term as president, around six lakh people have so far been deported for alleged illegal immigration. Donald Trump has also asked whether due process protections should apply in such cases, as his administration continues to highlight the "success" of his deportation programme.

All these actions are of a nation whose principal policy is unmitigated self-interest, commitments be damned. And given the sustained manner in which the U.S. has applied this policy, it subverts the universalism NASA invoked when it called its Artemis II mission "humanity's return to the moon". Doesn't inspire confidence In 2015, the U.S.

passed a law that allows its citizens to possess, use, and sell resources extracted from the moon, and which the Artemis Accords use as a governing norm. Legal expert Christopher Newman has argued that the Accords are thus a mechanism for the U.S. to force other countries to accept its interpretation of resource rights.

The lunar south pole contains water ice that can be used to make rocket fuel, enabling missions to Mars and beyond, but it is available only in finite quantities in a few locations. The Accords also introduce "safety zones" around lunar sites ostensibly to prevent harmful interference. They could in practice create exclusion zones around resource-rich areas, allowing early movers to consolidate control without formally violating the Outer Space Treaty.
