Category: Editorial
Title: CBSE curriculum will enable students to Part One

CBSE curriculum will enable students to understand the AI 'black box'

Students to understand the AI 'black box' The grand aim of the curriculum is to develop learners who do not merely consume technology, but are informed, capable, and responsible digital citizens, who can critically question, analyse, and even create, shaping our AI-rich future On April 1, the CBSE launched its Computational Thinking and Artificial Intelligence (CT & AI) curriculum for Classes 3 to 8, igniting considerable debate. Stakeholders, including students, teachers, and schools, need clarity on the design and objectives of the curriculum. The drivers of this curricular area are the aspirations enunciated in the National Education Policy 2020, which call for India to pioneer emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Coding, Robotics, etc.

The National Curriculum for School Education (NCF-SE 2023) recognises it as an area that needs to find a place in the school curriculum. This is a significant departure from the earlier approach, where curricular areas were limited to subjects such as Mathematics, Science, Social Sciences, and languages. Thus, accommodating these is challenging in the existing scheme.

Also, the subject of the introduction of this new curricular area remains an evolving issue. Thus, although the present effort of the CBSE seems to take that debate in one direction, it may provide a good starting point for the debates around the necessity and structuring of this area. The context is also the changing world around us.

No technological advancement has been as meteoric in its rise or as far-reaching as AI. AI has changed how we learn, work, and make decisions. In the context of education, students are increasingly engaging with AI tools; therefore, the real question for education is not whether students must be exposed to AI, but rather what is the best way to prepare and empower them to engage with AI meaningfully.

Another critical factor necessitating such efforts is the widespread accessibility of AI that has been enabled by a variety of tools, leading to an increasing tendency to conflate AI education with access/ability to use AI tools. Students are already experimenting with chatbots, image generators or coding tools. While such exposure is valuable, they end up treating these tools as black boxes.

What is the vision? Key to our efforts is our vision of an AI-ready generation that will not be a mere customer for these tools, but also participate in building these tools, and importantly, understand their risks, benefits and limitations. Some countries, including the UK, Finland, Singapore, Australia, China, and South Korea, have already integrated Computational Thinking and AI into their school curricula.

Our approach has been centred on the premise that such literacy demands the ability to think systematically about problems, data and solutions, which is where Computational Thinking (CT) becomes indispensable. CT is not coding, nor is it computer science. It advocates a systematic approach to problem-solving by breaking problems into parts (decomposition), identifying patterns, using abstraction, and designing step-by-step solutions (algorithms).

Brizard and Mills (2021) describe these as connected skills applicable across domains, from data analysis to automated decision-making. Yadav et al (2016) note that CT also involves knowing when a computer can help solve a problem more efficiently. CT thus forms a strong base for the development of AI and ML capacities; these foundational cognitive skills will serve their purpose beyond computing, as they are relevant across multiple disciplines and in day-to-day problem-solving.

CT connects naturally to the complex technologies that underpin AI. Machine learning heavily relies on pattern recognition. Key concepts in AI, such as statistical inference, high-dimensional vector spaces, and iterative optimisation, ultimately stem from structured ways of thinking about data and their relationships.
