Category: Editorial
Title: CBSE curriculum will enable students to Part Three

CBSE curriculum will enable students to understand the AI 'black box'

The grand aim of the curriculum is to develop learners who do not merely consume technology, but are informed, capable and responsible digital citizens, who can critically question, analyse, and even create, shaping our AI-rich future. By Karthik Raman The writer is a member of the core leadership, IIT Madras Bodhan AI Foundation and professor, Department of Data Science and AI, Wadhwani School of Data Science and AI, IIT Madras. The author wishes to acknowledge inputs from his team in preparing this article Lustre or bluster?: on West Asia, slowdown in the Indian economy India's economic mettle will be on test as it faces headwinds Data are now beginning to accumulate, revealing the slowdown in the Indian economy brought on by the crisis in West Asia.

The latest is the Index of Eight Core Industries. The data for March, the first month since the war broke out, show that these eight key industrial sectors together contracted by 0.4% over their level in March last year. This was the worst performance in 19 months but was not unexpected. The supply constraints, fuel shortages, and general subdued economic sentiments due to the conflict were bound to take a toll on the economy, especially given India's dependence on imports.

The private sector Manufacturing PMI for March also revealed a considerable slowdown, citing fewer fresh orders. Yet, the core sector data nonetheless make for a sobering read. Of the eight sectors, four contracted, one remained flat, and two witnessed sharp slowdowns. Notably, the worst performer was the fertilizer sector.

This, too, was expected given the constraints on natural gas imports. While the domestic natural gas sector grew by a relatively robust 6.4%, the fertilizer sector contracted by 24.6% in March 2026. The implications of this are severe. The agriculture sector is already set for a tough year, with the India Meteorological Department predicting an El Niño-impacted below-normal monsoon this year.

A poor harvest has a direct impact on rural demand, which is already far from robust. Sharp slowdowns in steel and cement production also show that construction activity has taken a hit as companies pause new investments. All of this  -  compounded by poor performances in the coal, crude oil, petroleum products and electricity sectors  -  dragged the overall index to its lowest full-year growth in 2025-26 since the COVID-19 pandemic hit the economy.

Most of the factors driving this recent slowdown are external. However, if they persist, they could turn India's economic tailwinds into substantial headwinds. The Narendra Modi government's first term was characterised by low inflation and high foreign investment. Domestic political momentum was such that voters also forgave devastating policy missteps such as demonetisation.

The pandemic and the global turn away from China also worked to India's advantage in terms of foreign direct investment in the second term. Low oil prices in the beginning of the third term, leading up to the war in Iran, helped inflation stay low. Yet, signs were emerging that foreign investors, spooked by India's trade frictions with Donald Trump, were cooling off on the Indian story.

Now the war has made it painfully clear that India is hostage to global dynamics. Inflation is rearing its head again. This, along with continued stagnation in household real incomes, means that the government will have to work that much harder to restore India's 'bright spot' sheen. Lunar governance should be multilateral The NASA Apollo 8 mission to the moon captured the iconic "earthrise" image the same year in which U.S.
