Category: Editorial
Title: Centuryold report that paved way for RBI Part Two

Century-old report that paved way for RBI

One, should the central bank be the Imperial Bank or a new entity? The nationalists preferred the Imperial Bank to serve as both the central bank and a commercial bank, as they were unsure of the new bank. However, the new global central banks set up in the 1920s functioned purely as central banks. The commission aligned with the new view and suggested that the Imperial Bank remain the great commercial bank, while central banking functions are shifted from this bank and the government to the RBI.

Two, should the central bank be owned by the state or private shareholders? Interestingly, the nationalists preferred state ownership, fearing that a bank owned by British capitalists would not serve Indian interests. Eventually, the government decided that the RBI will be a shareholders' bank, with the government owning a tiny share.

The share registers were kept at five centres: Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Madras, and Rangoon. To address nationalists' concerns, it was decided that the RBI will have prominent Indian ownership. The face value of the share was kept at Rs 100 and was covered extensively by the press, leading to oversubscription by 100%.

The RBI started as a private shareholder bank and was nationalised in 1949. Three, how shall the RBI be governed? The commission recommended that a nine-member central board comprising managing governor and a deputy managing governor will govern it. Later, debates suggested a 16- or 24-member board ensuring representation of Indian nationals, industry association leaders, and cooperative banks.

The authorities settled on a 15-member board comprising a governor, a deputy governor, four directors nominated by the Governor-General, eight directors representing the shareholders, and a government officer with no voting power. To sum up, although the Hilton Young Commission's report is largely forgotten, it still reads remarkably fresh. It describes not just the evolution of India's monetary policy, but also the politics that followed - familiar to central bank watchers today.

By Amol Agrawal, The author teaches at the National Institute of Securities Markets
