Category: Editorial
Title: Challenges of normalising IndoChina ties Part Two

Challenges of normalising Indo-China ties

Further progress is indeed possible if both nations restart the 50-odd government-to-government dialogue mechanisms that remain stalled. As the screening mechanism for investment proposals from land bordering nations like China has been amended, it perhaps makes sense to allow investments from EV manufacturers like BYD that failed to secure approval even though it had plans to invest $1 billion and was ready to have a local partner. Not doing so only ensures that EV technology transfer will remain blocked.

A major positive in this regard is the impending approval of investment from Horse Powertrain, a hybrid-engine venture backed by China's Zhejiang Geely Holding Group. The last major auto investment was nine years ago when state-owned SAIC Motor acquired General Motors' plant to launch the MG Motor brand. Opening up to more investments from China  -  that cumulatively reached as much as $17.28 billion (seven times higher than India's official estimates) from 2007 to 2025, according to American Enterprise Institute's China Global Investment Tracker  -  ensures its greater engagement in the country.

China has dominance over global supply chains. If India can plug into them with its advantages of an abundant supply of labour at highly competitive rates, it can export more and grow faster over the medium term. However, these possibilities of cooperation will materialise only if the two Asian powers perceive themselves as equals, which they are not.

Despite signs of a thaw in relations, the asymmetries can be addressed over the long haul by narrowing the economic power differential. Both nations can then fulfil the promise of an Asian century as they cooperate and compete with one another. Although India is the world's fifth-largest economy, China is six times larger as the second-largest economy.

This is reflected in relative military strength, with India in a disadvantageous position to resolve the border issue through force. The upshot is that India must steadily build up its economy through rapid growth. This will enable it to cope with the similar challenges of dealing with China and the US and their use of coercive geoeconomic measures.

Written by N Chandra Mohan The author is an economics and business commentator based in New Delhi.
