Category: Editorial
Title: Climate answers from informal settlements

Climate answers from informal settlements

When monsoon pours down across India, many of the country's citizens, across its large metropolises, confront a re-occurring predicament. When monsoon pours down across India, many of the country's citizens, across its large metropolises, confront a re-occurring predicament. Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, all witness inland floods; people wade their way through knee-high waters in Kolkata, while rafts come out on Mumbai's roads.

Monsoon floods do not stop at the city's roads, they enter homes, offices and hospitals, exposing a failing sewage system our cities seem simply unable to fix. On the other hand, summers witness intense heatwaves and drought, leaving many without potable water. Indian cities are in climate trouble, and adaptation to the unpredictability of climate change needs to be multifaceted.

While institutional and governmental measures can provide structural support, systems of adaptation often overlook the nuances of vulnerability that shape the diverse populations of Indian cities. As we enter an uncertain future with varied climate implications, inclusion of all people affected in adaptation building is non-negotiable. In Indian cities, residents of informal settlements, or slums, are among those most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.

Lack of stable income, paired with life in unplanned settlements makes slum inhabitants incredibly vulnerable to inland flood and heat stress. The challenges residents face are complex. Basic urban services such as availability of clean water, electricity, sanitation and well-built housing are scarce.

Such issues reduce the adaptive capacity of inhabitants. Unprecedented rain for a single day could mean lack of electricity and potable water for days, coupled with missed opportunities for income generation. Climate change impacts all, but wrestling with lack of basic services and constantly having to build life in resource constrained environments, residents of informal settlements receive the shorter stick of institutional climate adaptation.

A flood of difficulties does not however mean that informal settlements are spaces of desolation and doom. Slums are some of the most economically active and innovative spaces in the country, where production of ideas and material happens both at household levels and industrial scale. Mumbai's Dharavi hosts one of the largest recycling spaces in the world, with almost 60-80 per cent of the city's waste passing through the slums, being segregated and recycled by many inhabitants who do this for a living (Pulitzer, 2026).

Entrepreneurial sense resonates throughout informal settlements of the country, and can reflect a unique innovativeness required to tackle climate change. Scarcity of resources pushes informal settlement residents towards creativity, and inculcate a sense of community. It is therefore essential to not view slums as underdeveloped urban islands which need eradication or erasure.

Rather, informal settlements are spaces with which residents intertwine their identity, culture, and income opportunities. Slums of India therefore need to be viewed from a different perspective, one where inclusion of inhabitants in upgradation and planning is imperative. In fact, ingenuity amongst slum residents can strengthen institutional climate action.

When flood waters enter informal settlements, communities work together, sharing resources, building structural barriers, and clearing drainage. While systemic challenges, such as the lack of municipal support in informal settlements, require attention, it is equally important to recognise the creativity and resilience with which communities adapt to these challenges. The most vulnerable spaces also portray resilience and innovativeness.

Informal settlements are not passive spaces; they are urban makers. The answers to cost-effective sustainability may, in part, lie within the communities living in informal settlements. From inhabitants building cool roofs using locally sourced reflective paints to nature-based sustainability initiatives, such as creating mini green gardens in neighbourhoods, residents of informal settlements demonstrate their ability to act as agents of urban sustainability.

Innovation and entrepreneurial energy in informal spaces require support and scalability. Moreover, they need recognition as systems of adaptation that are inclusive and equitable, as cost restrictiveness is not unique to informal settlements, but a challenge that cities across the Global South face at large. Mechanisms of resourceful adaptation practices can therefore be replicated worldwide.

Lastly, awareness and involvement of inhabitants in adaptation practices can foster community mobilisation, particularly among younger demographics, creating spaces for discussion, community building, and expanding employment opportunities. By Ruchira Paul (The writer is an Associate at the Cities Forum, where she collaborates with international development organizations, national governments, and private stakeholders to implement policy solutions to support inclusive climate adaptation in cities across Asia and Africa)
