Category: Editorial
Title: Contradictions and utility Part Two

Contradictions and utility

Such delegations, in a way, have the blessings of the host country since they have a vested interest in the continuation of fossil fuels. Take the case of Brazil itself. It is the eighth-largest producer of oil and is exploiting fossil fuels even at the mouth of the Amazon. This is similar to Azerbaijan (which hosted COP29) whose economy is heavily dependent on fossil fuel exports.

There are other examples too, like Qatar (COP18). In the case of Brazil, there are other stark contradictions. Brazil has taken the initiative of starting a new scheme called Tropical Forest Forever Facility. The objective of this scheme is to incentivise the preservation of tropical forests. The irony is that Brazil cut down trees in the Amazon rainforest to build a four-lane highway to help host COP30.

Brazil, however, denies it saying that the construction of the road had begun much before it was decided to host COP 30 at Belém. While this may be debatable, the fact remains that thousands of trees were felled to build the road. In the meantime, the first draft of the COP30 communique has been tabled.

It includes subjects like climate finance, moving away from fossil fuels and unilateral trade measures. The subjects are nothing new but contentious, and the issue is of reaching a consensus. Going by the past probability, one knows the outcome beforehand. The moot point is whether COP can deliver any good, given the pulls and pressures each country faces on phasing out fossil fuels, the availability of finance, and a host of other issues with conflicting interests.

As it is, the interest of countries seems to be on the decline as the number of heads of government taking time out to attend COP meetings has gone down considerably. Further, less than half of the 195 countries involved have submitted revised nationally determined contributions, and many of those submitted are lacking any lustre. So this begs the question, is it time to dissolve COP?

The answer is an emphatic "no". If COP were to be disbanded today, it would lead to an unbridled growth in emissions. At least a few sane minds are putting their heads together in search of a solution. While COP may be unable to deliver the PA targets, in its absence we may see a temperature rise of 3°C or more.

By Somit Dasgupta, Senior visiting fellow, ICRIER Views are personal
