Category: Editorial
Title: Credible and creditable On Union Budget Part One

Credible and creditable: On Union Budget 2026-27

The Union Budget 2026-27 chose prudence over adventurism, and multipronged measures over Big Bang reforms Where Budget 2025 was largely dominated by the income-tax rate and slab relaxations, Budget 2026 has done away with Big Bang measures. Instead, its scattershot approach, through various sectoral and issue-based measures, when taken together, is aimed at propelling India's growth over the medium term. Given the level of geoeconomic and geopolitical uncertainties that the Indian economy faces, this diffused approach is likely a more effective policy than targeted Big Bang announcements would be.

This is not the time for further disruption. Budget 2026 contains announcements for the manufacturing sector, various services sectors, as well as particular provisions to help labour-intensive sectors such as textiles and leather. In terms of manufacturing, the Budget includes measures covering seven well thought-out areas: biopharma, semiconductors, electronics, rare earths, chemicals, capital goods and textiles.

Semiconductor and electronics manufacturing are the few sectors that have gained from the government's existing PLI schemes. The India Semiconductor Mission 2.0 and the increased allocation under the Electronics Component Manufacturing Scheme are appropriate follow-ups to this. These are sectors where India needs to become globally competitive.

The Biopharma SHAKTI scheme is aimed at making India a global biopharma manufacturing hub with an allocation of ₹10,000 crore over the next five years. Pharmaceuticals, already a sector that India does well in, are exempt from the U.S.'s 50% tariffs. It is also important to support those sectors that are currently hit by those same tariffs.

The National Export Promotion Mission announced in the last Budget was implemented only by December 2025, nine months into the financial year. The Centre should ensure that this Budget's integrated programme for the textiles sector does not face similar delays. Also, the various measures aimed at creating 'Champion MSMEs', providing them equity, liquidity, and professional support, must be implemented quickly.

MSMEs account for 48.6% of India's exports, and the EU FTA, even if it is implemented soon, will not kick in quick enough to offset the ongoing pain caused by the U.S. tariffs. The services sector, too, stands to benefit from Budget 2026. The high-powered 'education to employment and enterprise' standing committee, announced by the Finance Minister, should get off the ground soon.

The focus on health care and medical tourism, where India is already developing strengths, is a good start. In keeping with the Budget's multipronged approach, the Centre has sought to cater to the election-bound States this year through several smaller announcements  -  such as dedicated rare earth corridors to benefit Odisha, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, a Coconut Promotion Scheme for Kerala, an integrated East Coast Industrial Corridor for West Bengal, and the first of the new national waterways to begin in Odisha  -  rather than through the consolidated packages of the past. As for the Centre's finances, Budget 2026 offers a mix of expenditure enthusiasm and revenue sobriety.

The capital expenditure push, especially with regard to infrastructure creation, has continued, perhaps in reaction to the realisation that current conditions do not encourage private investment. Overall, capital expenditure is set to grow to ₹12.2 lakh crore in 2026-27, amounting to 4.4% of GDP, the highest in at least the last 10 years. This includes the announcement of dedicated freight corridors and training institutes for the manpower needed.
