Category: Editorial
Title: Custodian of reserves to manager of risk Part Two

Custodian of reserves to manager of risk

The RBI has not gambled  -  it has adopted a more sophisticated framework for managing currency risk. The challenge is ensuring that transparency in disclosure of the derivative management strategy, and its eventual unwinding, evolves alongside policy innovation. Should markets receive more guidance on the strategy for unwinding large forward positions?

Should Parliament and financial commentators devote greater attention to derivative exposures that increasingly shape India's external balance sheet? As central banking evolves, public understanding must evolve with it. These are not criticisms of the RBI. They are natural questions that arise as institutions become more sophisticated and central banking increasingly involves managing expectations, liquidity, derivatives, and confidence simultaneously.

Indeed, the RBI deserves credit for refusing to be constrained by outdated methods. A 21st-century economy cannot be managed with 20th- century tools. India's macroeconomic fundamentals remain sound, with ample reserves, contained inflation, and a resilient external and domestic banking sector. There is little evidence to suggest that India faces an imminent balance-of-payments crisis.

The principal long-term uncertainty, however, lies in the impact of AI on IT services, India's largest source of foreign exchange earnings. The paradox of modern central banking is that the more sophisticated its financial instruments become, the greater the need for transparency and accountability. Confidence ultimately rests not only on strong reserves or clever balance-sheet management, but also on trust in the institution deploying them.

The RBI's $100-billion forward position is, therefore, neither a cause for panic nor a reason for celebration. It marks the quiet evolution of India's central bank from being principally the custodian of foreign exchange reserves to becoming an active manager of financial risk demanding exceptional judgement in the use of its chosen instruments. This transformation may well prove necessary  -  even visionary  -  in hindsight.

But every transformation of this magnitude deserves informed public debate and disclosures today  -  not because we distrust the institution, but because we value it. By Prabal Basu Roy, The author is a Sloan Fellow of the London Business School and a board member
