Category: Editorial
Title: Debating Union Budget as turning point or Part Two

Debating Union Budget 2026 as turning point or tinkering

Likewise, rationalising procedures at points of entry of goods would perhaps reduce delays, thus improving ease of production and exports. Focus on electronics, the China factor The Budget makes substantial provision for augmenting the production of electronics parts and sub-assemblies, which form the single largest product-group of dependence on China. The same holds for rare earth materials (used in the production of EVs and electronic goods)  -  a choke point as the Economic Survey recently and rightly highlighted.

To tackle it, the Budget proposes to create a dedicated rare earths corridor running through "mineral-rich States of Odisha, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu ... to promote mining, processing, research and manufacturing". Similar to encouraging the production of lithium-ion cells for battery storage, the Budget proposes to extend the tax exemption on capital goods to produce these items.

Policymakers perceive India's trade integration has to begin with labour-intensive goods. Now, with the Trump tariffs on India's exports, there is an acute need to enhance the productivity of such goods to overcome these tariffs and ensure diversification away from the U.S. In line with this view, the Budget has laid emphasis on promoting new Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSME) clusters, modernising the old or "legacy" clusters (about 120 of them), and providing financial assistance to MSMEs to tap the capital market.

In principle, these measures are welcome. However, the Budget seems to fall short in efforts to boost fixed investment. To augment industrial capabilities, India needs to encourage investments in high-tech industries. Such technologies are mostly proprietary items of multinational corporations that often come bundled with foreign direct investment (FDI).

In recent years, net FDI, as a ratio of GDP, has become practically zero. The Budget seems to make little effort to correct for the decline in foreign high-tech investments. Geopolitical uncertainties perhaps make it difficult to attract such technology-intensive investments, at least for now. While the government is committed to promoting exports, the Budget has permitted firms located in special economic zones (SEZs) to sell a part of their output in domestic territory.

This seems regressive. The government should tackle their hurdles to augment exports, rather than choose the softer option of allowing sales in the domestic market. A silence on Centre-State fiscal issues The Budget, which has been presented in a difficult global context, seems well-intentioned to tackle import dependence in domestic manufacturing to attain greater self-reliance.

However, considering the uncertainties, the Budget seems silent on many difficult issues. Centre-State fiscal issues have also been overlooked, considering the impending implementation of the recommendations of the Sixteenth Finance Commission. Whether the proposed measures would yield desired results to reverse India's industrial decline and import dependence (especially on China, a strategic threat) would depend on the specifics of the proposals (which we have not seen) and how they are implemented.

R. Nagaraj was with the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research (IGIDR), Mumbai
