Category: Editorial
Title: Debating Union Budget as turning point or Part One

Debating Union Budget 2026 as turning point or tinkering

Tinkering Budget 2026-27 needs to be read in the context of much geopolitical turmoil As is widely understood, the annual Budget is a political document responding to short to medium-term economic challenges. Formally, it is an annual revenue and expenditure statement outlining the government's priorities. As with any financial statement, the fine print matters the most, not obvious from the media headlines.

Yet, it is useful to read the Budget closely to glean the broad direction of economic policy, especially as there are no other long-term policy documents or explicit economic targets in the public domain to locate the annual Budget. Setting to the Budget The proximate context of the Budget is the recent eruption of geopolitical turmoil triggered during the second term of the Donald Trump presidency in the United States. Many political and economic arrangements  -  or, the rules and norms of international relations that have been in place since the fall of the Berlin Wall  -  are now upended.

India's long-term economic and security arrangements with Russia are under threat. Mr. Trump's steep tariffs on India's labour-intensive goods have dashed hopes of a closer economic relationship with the U.S. In response, India is seeking closer ties with the European Union in the form of "mother of all" free trade agreement (FTA), though its details are still unclear.

India's import dependence on China continues despite the policy efforts taken, since 2020, to correct this. Diplomatic relations remain strained. For instance, China has imposed restrictions on the exports of critical minerals, tunnel boring machines and the services of skilled workers for the electric vehicle (EV) industry.

Budget 2026-27 needs to be read in this context. Unlike previously, this Budget highlights the urgency of strengthening domestic manufacturing. It also aims to streamline import duties and procedures in order to reduce imports and achieve self-reliance, and to speed up exports. Factually speaking, the Indian manufacturing sector has not performed satisfactorily for a while now, despite headline GDP growth of 6.5% to 7% annually in real terms (net of inflation).

India has deindustrialised prematurely; the share of manufacturing in GDP has declined or, at best, has remained constant. Manufacturing employment in total employment has also declined. The official GDP numbers for manufacturing seem overstated due to infirmities in estimation. Alternative figures, based on the more reliable Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), based on time-tested production accounts of factories, show distinctly slower output growth rates.

With very modest growth in fixed investment (or gross fixed capital formation), industrial capacity has eroded during the last decade. Rising import dependence for most capital and intermediate goods is a reason for modest industrial performance. An inverted duty structure wherein intermediate goods face higher tariffs than final goods seems to be responsible for the poor industrial investments.

Policy initiatives such as 'Make in India' (2014), Aatma Nirbhar Bharat (or Self-Reliant India Movement) in 2020 and Production Linked Incentives (2021) seem to have largely failed to dent India's rising import dependence in manufactured goods despite some widely applauded successes in mobile phone assembly (with high import content, best exemplified by Apple iPhone exports). Hence, the Budget aims to tackle domestic vulnerabilities. The tariff modifications seem to correct for the inverted duty structures (IDS) by reducing basic customs duties on capital and intermediate goods in order to encourage domestic value addition.
