Category: Editorial
Title: Delimitation a case of to be or not to be Part Two

Delimitation  -  a case of to be or not to be

The government decided to redraw the territories of constituencies to ensure inter se parity in terms of population across them, as this balance had been disrupted/disturbed due to large-scale internal migration of people in search of employment and livelihood since 1971. To this end, the constitutional provisions were amended in order to provide that territories of the constituencies would be readjusted on the basis of the 2001 Census figures without altering the number of Lok Sabha or Assembly seats. The Statement of Objects and Reasons in the Bill for the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, inter alia, stated that, in view of the progress of family planning programmes across different parts of the country, the government  -  under the National Population Policy strategy  -  decided to extend the freeze on undertaking fresh delimitation up to the year 2026.

This was intended as a motivational measure to enable State governments to continue pursuing the goal of population stabilisation. Therefore, the apparent thinking at that point of time was that population growth would stabilise across all States within the next 25 years. As per the provisions of Articles 82 and 170(3), as amended in 2001 by the Eighty-fourth Amendment Act, the freeze on further delimitation is to be in place until the population figures of the first Census to be taken after 2026 are published.

In fact, a new national Census (against the delayed 2021 Census) is under way. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the current Delimitation Bill, 2026, inter alia, noted that the growth of population across different constituencies along with migration from one place to another  -  especially rural to urban migration  -  "have resulted in varying density of population in electoral constituencies"; the Bill sought to address this issue. Ironically, for bringing about parity in population among constituencies, both intra-State and inter-States, the population figures of the 2011 Census were to be adopted  -  this means that the base data to be used for course correction or updating would have been 15-year-old population figures.

Looking ahead There is nothing to suggest that migration has either stopped or slowed since 2011, or that population growth has stabilised uniformly across all regions. Against this backdrop, there is no assurance/guarantee that constituencies based on the 2011 Census would stand the test of parity or uniformity in terms of population  -  and, by extension, in the electorate  -  at the point when the delimitation exercise would have been completed. It was quite likely that when constituencies are finally carved out a couple of years down the line, many of them would exhibit clear and evident real-time disparities when compared with the principle set out in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the present Bill.

Article 81(2) of the Constitution provides that each State shall be allotted Lok Sabha seats in such a manner that the ratio of seats to population, as far as practicable, remains the same across all States. There is no dispute that the letter of this Article only refers to population as a criterion. However, if we take a broader view, there would be inherent provisions in the Constitution to support the States to retain their scale of parliamentary representation.

There may also be scope to incorporate additional parameters/markers alongside population, especially since the number of seats is expected to increase significantly this time, unlike the relatively modest/nominal increases in earlier exercises. After all, States are the component units forming the Union. Strong components will only strengthen the Union.

K.F. Wilfred Former Senior Principal Secretary of the Election Commission of India
