Category: Editorial
Title: Delimitation Alternative Part Three

Delimitation Alternative

Thus, in the USA or Australia, the lower house, the House of Representatives, has members elected directly by citizens based on their populations, while in the upper house, the Senate, each state sends an equal number of representatives regardless of their populations (two in the USA, 12 in Australia). Other federations follow variants of this arrangement, but in all federations, the lower house representation is based on proportionality to population, while the upper chamber gives higher weightage and equal voting power to smaller states for this balance. In India, however, representation in the Rajya Sabha, made through the electoral college of all elected MLAs, is again linked to population, and hence cannot provide equal or near-equal representation to states.

Thus, larger states get higher representation in both houses, instead of the Rajya Sabha acting as a counter-weight to the Lok Sabha to strike a balance. Unlike in other federations, our Parliament thus lacks a true federal character. If the Constitution has to be amended, why should it not change the Rajya Sabha to give equal representation to all states, instead of changing the Lok Sabha?

I would strongly argue that proportionality in representation is an inviolable constitutional principle, and all delimitations must restore this proportionality, which has to be done gradually, over the next two or three delimitation cycles, to make it politically acceptable. But we must urgently reform representation in the Rajya Sabha to give greater federal powers to states with smaller populations, whether by equal representation or by weighted voting so that each state gets the same votes. Delimitation should also be a statutory mechanism, like the Finance Commissions, and not dependent on political discretion.

It will be difficult to achieve a consensus, as the larger states would resolutely object to any dilution of their political powers, but the debate over delimitation is ultimately not about numbers but about the evolving idea of India. It is not a contest between North and South, nor a reward or penalty for demographic performance. A mature federation cannot indefinitely postpone democratic equality, nor can it ignore the legitimate concerns of its constituent states.

The answer lies not in freezing history but in managing change through constitutional statesmanship and political consensus. It will be a test of the constitutional maturity of our federal republic. By GOVIND BHATTACHARJEE The author, a former Director General of the CAG of India, is a visiting Professor at the IIM, Calcutta
