Category: Editorial
Title: Delimitation Alternative Part Two

Delimitation Alternative

The government did not consult the opposition for a consensus, and the bills were defeated. Perhaps it was introduced just to score a political point before the elections in West Bengal and Assam. But it opened up important constitutional questions, and experts have come up with many alternatives to address the concerns of both the North and the South, which include a pure population-based delimitation after the 2027 Census, a uniform increase in seats with protection of existing state shares, and hybrid formulas with population as the main criterion, but giving compensatory protection states with low fertility ratio, or, as suggested by professor Amitabh Kundu, adding additional seats depending on the states' respective shares in the population increase since 1971 to their existing numbers.

While a pure population-based redistribution, though the constitutional default, has become politically contentious, the Centre would need wider consensus to proceed in the matter. But none of these alternatives address the fundamental constitutional questions, which are: (a) Does the 1976 freeze on seats imply that federal accommodation has become an enduring constitutional principle? (b) Why delimitation must achieve a balance between electoral equality and federal accommodation?

and (c) Why states that have achieved low fertility deserve continued constitutional protection through enhanced parliamentary representation? Let us try to address these. First, the 42nd-Amendment freeze was a political compromise designed to address an exceptional historical situation. It never supplanted the underlying constitutional principle embodied in Articles 81 and 82, and a temporary constitutional arrangement cannot become a permanent constitutional norm; it will only replace one distortion with another.

Second, Constitutional debate is more complex than a mere balance between electoral equality and federal compromise; it deals with equality among states, but most importantly, equality among citizens. Lok Sabha is the House of the People, in which people, the citizens, are at the centre of democratic representation. Any departure from this undermines democracy.

A citizen cannot possess greater parliamentary influence merely because his or her State successfully implemented family planning. Third, attaining low fertility, which was a national objective, indeed deserves recognition and reward, but it does not follow that the reward must come only through higher political representation and permanently enhanced voting power. A better way is to reward the states fiscally, thorough Finance Commission transfers or other mechanisms.

Democratic representation, thus dissociated from development policy, can then offer better incentives. Besides, it would be unfair to penalise non-performing states ~ their inability does not necessarily reflect their unwillingness or inefficiency. Fertility is a product of many historical and structural factors, including economic development, female literacy, urbanisation, health infrastructure, infant mortality, etc.

which often are not within a state's control. Experts have pointed out that federations may be democracies, but they are also unions of states, and hence must balance democratic equality between citizens with federal equity among their constituent units. Federations usually find a way to achieve this balance, some even by giving asymmetric powers to some constituents, like Canada or Spain, while other federations achieve this through their federal legislatures.
