Category: Editorial
Title: Delimitation Alternative Part One

Delimitation Alternative

Article 326 of the Constitution provides that elections to the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies shall be based on universal adult suffrage, implying that every adult citizen has an equal right to vote. Article 326 of the Constitution provides that elections to the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies shall be based on universal adult suffrage, implying that every adult citizen has an equal right to vote. Articles 81 and 82 further provide that the ratio between population and seats should be broadly the same for all states and hence needs adjustments after every census, implying that every vote across India shall have the same weight.

Thus, representation in legislatures will be based on population, with each constituency representing more or less the same population ~ hence the need for delimitation after every census and consequent readjustment of seats, which may or may not cause an increase in the total strength. This principle was followed initially, and the Lok Sabha strength went up from 489 in 1951 to 521 after the 1971 census. After the creation of new states in the North-East and the bifurcation of UP, MP and Bihar, 22 more seats were added by amending the Constitution and the Representation of People Act, raising the strength to 543.

But in 1976, during the period of Emergency, this strength was frozen under the infamous 42nd Amendment Act, ostensibly to balance population equality with federal equity. Southern states were making better progress in population control through family planning, a national priority that became an obsession during the Emergency, and to encourage population control, it was stipulated that further delimitation would occur only after 2000. The idea was simple: if a State could not control population, its relative representation in parliament would decline.

In 2001, the 84th Constitutional Amendment extended this freeze until the first Census after 2026. Now we are into it. The average population represented by one Lok Sabha member was only a million in 1971. By the next Lok Sabha election in 2029, it would increase 2.7 times, but this increase would become extremely uneven between northern and southern states.

Thus, an MP from Bihar, UP, Tamil Nadu, and Kerala would represent respectively 3.5, 3.1, 2.7, 2.0 and 1.8 million people. This is a departure from the proportional representation principle. If delimitation is done according to the present Lok Sabha strength and the respective populations of states, Bihar and UP will gain about 10-11 seats each, while Tamil Nadu would lose 10-11 and Kerala 7-8 seats.

Southern states are naturally concerned about losing their political influence and voice in national policymaking, while northern states are clamouring for equal representation frozen since 1976. Any attempt to increase the Lok Sabha strength while allocating the seats based on population would be unlikely to allay the fears of the southern states about a possible redistribution of political influence towards the BJP-ruled states in the Hindi belt. In April 2026, the government introduced three related Bills in Parliament: Constitution (131st Amendment) Bill, Delimitation Bill, 2026, and the Union Territories Laws (Amendment) Bill.

These bills proposed to increase the Lok Sabha membership to 850 by increasing each state's representation by 50 per cent to 815 so that no state would lose any seat, while keeping 35 seats for UTs. But it kept intact the existing proportion of each State and the inequality in their relative representations. The Bill did not constitutionally guarantee protection of states' shares, and left it open for any Parliament in future to decide otherwise, for example, based on the population of a subsequent census.
