Category: Editorial
Title: Digital agriculture and the problem of Part Two

Digital agriculture and the problem of exclusion

There is a need for focused attention on how digital agriculture may reshape rural labour markets, and design support systems, including new skills and alternative employment opportunities, for those displaced. The DAM, however, offers no institutional mechanism to anticipate potential disruption or support affected workers. Access to digital infrastructure, and literacy are indispensable preconditions for effective realisation of digital agriculture.

Official data, however, points to a significant gap. Analysis of unit-level data from the Comprehensive Modular Survey (2025) conducted by the National Sample Survey Office reveals that only around half of rural adults report both owning a smartphone and having internet access within their household. The proportion is significantly lower among rural adult women: just over a third live in internet-enabled households and own a smartphone.

These numbers are striking given the increasing role of women in agriculture. Digital literacy presents another concern. A broad definition, such as the ability to use a computer and the internet, would indicate that a huge majority of rural households are digitally literate. But this masks a serious gap in meaningful digital use.

When defined as the ability to use the internet for informational purposes, more than a quarter of rural households are digitally illiterate. Nearly half of rural adults report inability to use the internet for informational purposes. Digital illiteracy is disproportionately higher among women and marginalised groups.

Such levels of digital illiteracy prevent the realisation of the capabilities offered by digital technologies in agriculture. They also raise concerns around data privacy and transparency, issues not addressed here. A national policy framework for digital agriculture must therefore take a long-term and holistic view of its implications, not only for agriculture but for the wider economy.

The DAM, however, falls short of such a vision. By Sai Chandan Kotu, Sandipan Baksi and Tapas Modak Kotu is Senior Research Assistant, Baksi is Director, and Modak is Joint Director, Foundation for Agrarian Studies
