Category: Editorial
Title: Digital agriculture in India Problems of Part Two

Digital agriculture in India: Problems of inclusion

Digital literacy We turn now to the question of digital literacy in rural India. Data from CMST, underlines that 96 per cent of all rural households had at least one member (aged five or above) who had used either a mobile, smart phone or a computer (ICT device). And 90 per cent of these households reported at least one member with the ability to use the internet.

The critical feature is the ability to use the internet for informational use and not just for entertainment and communication. In this regard, in 27 per cent of these households no person had the ability to use internet for informational purposes  -  defined in the CMST as activities such as gaining knowledge, studying or job-related purposes, making digital payment, ticket booking etc. This points to the low levels of digital literacy, which becomes evident when we look at the data at the level of individuals.

More than 80 per cent of the rural adult population had used an ICT device in the last three months from the date of the survey. But 48 per cent of them were unable to use the internet for informational purposes. To put it differently, at least 39 per cent of rural adults can be regarded as digitally illiterate, and the number would be even higher if the criterion was ability to use computers instead of mobile phones.

The survey also explored levels of proficiency in the use of ICT tools. Only 55 per cent of rural adults with access to smartphones were able to send messages with an attachment, a basic digital task. Only 40 per cent of rural adults with access to smartphones were able to execute online transactions.

And with a more complex task, that of reporting cybercrime, the figure drops to just 12 per cent for men and 8 per cent for women. Way forward The CMST data clearly shows that the prerequisites for a digital transformation of agriculture  -  reliable internet, ownership or access to smartphones, digital literacy, and proficiency in executing basic ICT tasks, are far from satisfactory. Even though access to smartphones and the internet has risen sharply, significant sections of the rural population including women and persons from marginalised social groups have limited access to the digital world.

What have been the policy efforts to address the observed inequalities in access to digital infrastructure and high levels of digital illiteracy? Kerala has shown the way. It was the first state to recognise access to internet as a basic right in 2019, and in 2025, the State reported universal digital literacy.

This was accompanied by public investment of Rs 1500 crores to set up the Kerala Fibre Optic Network (K-FON) to improve the infrastructure for fibre optic network and ensure universal and equitable access to the internet. The experience at the national level, however, leaves a lot to be desired. The Government of India established a Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF), now renamed as Digital Bharat Nidhi to support the expansion of telecommunication and digital infrastructure in underserved remote and rural areas.

Set up in 2002, this fund is financed by a Universal Access Levy (UAL) on the gross revenue of telecom operators. While ₹1,87,036 crore have thus far been collected through the UAL, only around half the amount has been disbursed, and today, the consolidated fund has accumulated more than ₹94,000 crore. Seeing the unspent funds in the corpus of USOF, telecom operators have called for a suspension or abolition of the levy.
