Category: Editorial
Title: Dynamics of credit deposit growth Part One

Dynamics of credit, deposit growth

Too much credit growth can cause inflation and too little can constrain growth. Quality of credit matters Over the last five years (2022-2026), credit growth rate has been outpacing deposit growth rate. There has been a lot of media buzz implying subtly that this creates liquidity crisis and even financial stability issue.

Credit/Deposit ratio had gone up from 70 per cent to nearly 82 per cent. Focussing on gaps in growth rates to the exclusion of gaps in absolute amount may not tell the full story because the base for the two are different. As seen from Table 1, deposits growth rate lagged credit growth rate by 5 per cent, 7 per cent, 1 per cent and 4.5 per cent during the four-year period 2023- 2026, respectively.

In absolute terms, the gap is only ₹1 lakh crore, ₹3 lakh crore, (-) ₹4 lakh crore, and ₹1 lakh crore respectively. This absolute gap is hardly 1- 1.5 per cent of the deposit base and may not by any stretch of imagination threaten financial stability. Credit growth rate outpacing deposit growth rate is not new.

It has been the norm for most part of 2000-2020. RBI Annual report bears this out. The average deposit growth rate during the 10-year period of 2000-2010 was 18.1 per cent, lagging behind credit growth rate of 22.4 per cent. This, however, is not a sustainable growth model. Loanable funds While analysing the gap in absolute terms it is important to note that not all deposits are available for providing credit.

CRR and SLR are pre-emptions out of deposits. Therefore, one has to calculate the available loanable funds. But the available funds are also affected by two other factors, one is the increase in capital stock and long term borrowings and the other is the change in CRR and SLR. For example, in the recent period CRR was brought down from 4.5 per cent in 2024 to 3 per cent in 2026.

SLR came down from 21.25 per cent in 2016 to 18 per cent in 2020 and has remained at that level since then. Thus, looking at the problem from the point of view of individual banks the comparison must be the total availability of loanable funds and credit dispersal. From the available data (Table 2), the outstanding loanable deposits cover outstanding credit till 2025.

However, this trend has changed in 2026 and the outstanding credit surpasses loanable deposits and the gap widened for June quarter. This needs to be monitored even though there is no systemic issue as of now. There is less scope for further reduction in CRR. SLR investments at 28.5 per cent, are far in excess of the RBI requirement of 18 per cent.

Some of the banks with significant lag of deposit growth are using excess SLR for repo borrowings in the market which are quite significant and reached a high of ₹17 lakh crore. Banks also raised funds through infrastructure/green Tier 2 bonds and owned funds increased significantly as profits and plough back have improved. Aggregative picture Text books on money and banking present an alternative view on the relationship between credit and deposits.

It is argued that in a fractional reserve system, lending leads to multiple creation of deposits. A bank is willing to lend say 90 per cent of the deposits because reserve requirement and customer behaviour in withdrawing cash taken together do not exceed 10 per cent of the deposits. When a bank lends, it creates in favour of the borrower a deposit.
