Category: Editorial
Title: Economy remains resilient but the road ahead Part One

Economy remains resilient, but the road ahead is likely to be less forgiving than last year

But the road ahead is likely to be less forgiving than last year As 2026-27 progresses, the growth-inflation mix is likely to become less favourable, with growth moderating and inflation rising. Crisil expects GDP growth of 7 per cent and inflation of 5.1 per cent India's GDP growth of 7.8 per cent in the first quarter once again exceeded expectations, continuing a pattern seen over the past several quarters. Growth surpassed both the median forecast of 6.8 per cent by professional forecasters and the RBI's revised projection of 7 per cent.

The outperformance underscores the strength of India's domestic drivers and its ability to navigate an increasingly uncertain global environment. Even amid continuing conflict in West Asia and weather-related uncertainties, high-frequency indicators had signalled strong momentum across sectors. Robust industrial activity, healthy consumption and strong goods exports, alongside accelerating government investment, were the key drivers of growth in the first quarter of this fiscal.

The residual impact of policy measures introduced last fiscal year, coupled with continued support through direct benefit transfers, also bolstered growth. Such programmes have expanded steadily, with 17 states now providing cash transfers, primarily to women. The impact of GST rate cuts was particularly visible in the automobile sector.

Dealer discounts and higher disposable incomes resulting from income-tax relief provided additional support. According to data from the Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, sales of passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles and two-wheelers rose 26 per cent, 20.3 per cent and 18.3 per cent respectively in the first quarter. Retail credit growth remained robust with other personal loans, a proxy for short-term consumption, growing at 14.2 per cent.

Also, households were cushioned against the sharp rise in crude prices with government and oil companies absorbing most of it, particularly in the initial phase of conflict. That said, as 2026-27 progresses, the growth-inflation mix is likely to become less favourable, with growth moderating and inflation rising. Crisil expects GDP growth of 7 per cent and inflation of 5.1 per cent.

The moderation in growth reflects a more challenging external environment, marked by disruptions from the conflict in West Asia, unresolved tariff issues with the US, weather-related risks and a strong base effect in the second half. The two exogenous factors that worked in India's favour last year, low crude oil prices and a normal monsoon, are unlikely to provide similar support this year. Meanwhile, the conflict in West Asia has disrupted supply chains, increased insurance, freight and input costs, and is likely to weigh on both global and domestic growth.

Weather-related risks also warrant close monitoring as El Niño conditions in the equatorial Pacific intensify. Over the past 25 years, five of the six El Niño years have resulted in below-normal rainfall. This year, cumulative rainfall was 14 per cent below the long-period average (LPA) at the end of August.

July and August together account for 62 per cent of monsoon rainfall. While rainfall in July was 1 per cent above the LPA, August recorded a deficit of 16 per cent. The India Meteorological Department has also signalled below-normal rainfall in September. There are, however, some mitigating factors. India's net irrigated area has risen by 10 percentage points to 59 per cent over the past decade, improving resilience to rainfall shocks.
