Category: Editorial
Title: Economics in the st century Part Two

Economics in the 21st century

How new technology is reshaping jobs in the 21st century One of the defining characteristics of the 21st-century economy is rapid digital transformation through artificial intelligence (AI), automation, etc. - the growth of the digital economy, crypto assets, the shift of global power towards emerging markets, growing inequality, geopolitical trade shifts, and serious environmental challenges impacting natural capital. Historically, when new technology storms in, mostly unskilled workers lose jobs.

But perhaps for the first time in history, a large number of college-educated people are now losing their jobs - courtesy of generative AI (GenAI). The first quarter of the 21st century has witnessed this extraordinary phenomenon. Overall, the crises of the 21st century demand a new economic understanding, as economists like Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz have said.

The global economic crisis of 2008 and the shock of COVID-19 have eroded people's faith in the traditional demand-supply-based, supply chain-dependent economy. The need for different forms of redistribution and even projects similar in nature to Universal Basic Income has been emphasised in various forums. As Oxford Professor David Vines has said, "The old model of 'macroeconomics' was built for a stable world free from large economic shocks.

If we ever lived in such a world, we no longer do." Vines and Oxford economist Samuel Wills have undertaken a project called 'Rethinking Macroeconomics,' where they call for a shift away from the assumptions that have underpinned economic theory for decades but don't meet today's challenges. A more open and diverse paradigm is emerging, which is far better equipped to deal with contemporary challenges such as the global financial crisis, climate change, and Covid-19, they believed. For long, macroeconomics has been dominated by the 'New Keynesian Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium' model.

It's based on the idea that all disruptions are temporary and the economy eventually returns to a stable 'equilibrium.' Vines believes that the old core idea is a major deviation from reality. If we want an economy suitable for tackling the challenges of the 21st century, understanding the possibility of multiple economic equilibria might be crucial. Thus, economics in the 21st century so far is highly influenced by rapid digital transformation, shifting global power to emerging markets, rising inequality/ debt, geopolitical trade shifts, and critical environmental challenges impacting natural capital, leading to slower projected growth, labour market polarisation, increased focus on green tech, and a need for new social contracts balancing individual responsibility with societal support amid technological disruption and climate threats.

These combine to create a turbulent, uncertain, but opportunity-filled economic landscape for the future, requiring adaptive strategies from governments, businesses, and individuals. By Atanu Biswas (The author is Professor of statistics, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata.)
