Category: Editorial
Title: Elections brought our households to a stop Part Two

Elections brought our households to a stop: The domestic labour crisis urban India keeps ignoring

As economic theory would predict, this negative shock to supply pushed up wages. Hourly app rates increased, and even traditional contracts became costlier as urban employers scrambled to keep households running. Is this wage revision permanent, or will the market snap back to the old equilibrium as labour supply stabilises?

The scale of disruption caused by an entirely anticipated event has once again exposed how precarious the urban informal labour market really is. The app-based outside option for workers may have positive spillover effects on traditional contracts and alter labour market norms. It remains to be seen, however, whether and how much workers will actually benefit.

During the election crunch, many app-based domestic workers likely clocked 10-11-hour days moving across multiple unfamiliar homes to service back-to-back bookings with few breaks. Customers tend to extract the most value for booked hours, but who is tracking the toll on the worker? The commodification of human labour is a worrying trend and a product of the same mindset that has perpetuated such lopsided work arrangements in the first place.

For many of us, the first time we cleaned or cooked for ourselves was during the Covid-19 lockdown or during a stint abroad where the labour costs might have been prohibitive. And while we talked about our exhaustion for months, we don't seem to remember that as employers. As workers return to cities again, perhaps it is time to think afresh about dignity and respect for people who provide essential services, create fairer contracts that recognise human effort, and maybe also build these skills for ourselves?

Something is not right if a state election thousands of kilometres away can bring our households to a halt. By Garima Agarwal The writer is an assistant professor of Economics at Azim Premji University, Bangalore. She works on issues of women's participation in the economy. Views are personal
