Category: Editorial
Title: Ending the HIVAIDS epidemic Indias next big Part One

Ending the HIV/AIDS epidemic, India's next big public health opportunity

India's next big public health opportunity The National AIDS and STD Control Programme-Phase-VI is technologically modern, epidemiologically precise, and socially grounded India stands at a turning point in its battle against HIV/AIDS (human immunodeficiency virus/Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). Four decades, after the first case was reported, the country has built one of the world's most expansive and resilient national HIV prevention and treatment programmes. The National AIDS and STD Control Programme (NACP) has shown undeniable gains.

New infections have fallen by nearly half since 2010, AIDS-related deaths have dropped by more than 80%, viral suppression now exceeds 97% among those on treatment, and India has transitioned entirely onto Dolutegravir-based regimens  -  placing it among the global leaders in treatment efficacy. There are still hurdles However, there can be no room for complacency. As the country transitions into the NACP Phase-VI (NACP VI) for 2026-31, it must confront the reality that India's epidemic is still evolving, and in some places, is accelerating.

The overall low national prevalence of 0.20% masks emerging hotspots and newer vulnerabilities. States such as Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and Punjab have reported rising incidence, driven largely by injecting drug use. Among people who inject drugs, HIV prevalence is 40 times the national average, with some hotspots reporting exponential increases.

With an estimated one-in-160 chance of transmission from a single needle-sharing event, HIV epidemics linked to injecting drug use can spiral rapidly if not responded effectively. In addition, a growing proportion of new infections now occur among individuals acquiring HIV from casual or regular partners  -  signalling a shift beyond traditional "key populations". India's young demographic  -  2.25 crore adolescents entering the 15-25 year age cohort annually  -  remains vulnerable with easy access to digital platforms, enabling risky sexual behaviour and substance use.

India has made substantial gains in reducing vertical transmission. Universal screening and treatment of antenatal mothers for HIV and syphilis, early infant diagnosis, and paediatric prophylaxis have driven mother-to-child transmission down from over 25% in 2020 to 10% in 2024. Yet, this remains above the 5% threshold for elimination.

Steps to take Simply put, the virus has adapted. It affects those younger, is more dispersed, and exploiting newer vulnerabilities. Addressing these challenges requires a fresh blueprint. The NACP-VI is envisioned as India's boldest and most forward-looking HIV strategy. It aligns with United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 3.3 of ending AIDS as a public health threat by 2030  -  and is rooted in four big shifts.

First, India's diverse vulnerability profile calls for transforming prevention to follow people not categories. Beyond traditional "high-risk groups", the programme must address overlapping vulnerabilities created by social and structural factors. Under the Sampoorna Suraksha framework, universalised prevention will ensure interventions reach vulnerable individuals rather than labels.

Artificial Intelligence-driven self-risk assessments, virtual outreach, newer pharmaceutical tools, and disease surveillance platforms for tracking hotspots or super-spreaders will power the next generation of prevention and service linkage. Strategies targeted at epidemics driven by intravenous drug use will be central to the NACP-VI in reverse the epidemic. Second, NACP VI needs to build on a 'detect early, treat effectively, retain for life' approach.

India's success in expanding high quality, free-of-cost anti-retroviral treatment and viral suppression is unprecedented. Nevertheless, retention for treatment adherence and early diagnosis remain work in progress. Linkage pathways using Ayushman Bharat Health Account (ABHA), telemedicine and digital follow-ups for antiretroviral therapy (ART) dispensation will help overcome service delivery barriers.
