Category: Editorial
Title: Ending the HIVAIDS epidemic Indias next big Part Two

Ending the HIV/AIDS epidemic, India's next big public health opportunity

NACP-VI's integration with ABHA and Ayushman Arogya Mandirs is an opportunity to mainstream HIV care within the wider public health ecosystem. Third, eliminating vertical transmission of HIV and Syphilis is a national health imperative. By augmenting synergies with Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, and Adolescent Health (RMNCH+A), data inflow from the private sector and decentralised supply chains for screening kits, India can achieve elimination by 2030.

However, this requires every pregnant woman  - regardless of geography, caste, income or marital status  -  to be reached. Fourth, the programme must renew its emphasis on ending stigma. Stigma is the single biggest driver of invisibility, delayed diagnosis and untreated infection. The HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017 is a rights-based legislation for infected and affected people living with HIV AIDS.

The act promotes service uptake in a stigma-and discrimination-free environment. Yet, stigma persists in homes, hospitals, workplaces and even policies. Strong concerted efforts must be taken to address persisting stigma and discrimination. The journey so far India's journey in HIV prevention has been marked with several courageous milestones.

Investing early in HIV containment and prevention led to reversal of the epidemic trajectory, saving an entire generation from suffering and morbidity. It also resulted in a a healthy demographic dividend contributing to the economic growth story. NACP's demonstrable track record of service delivery on scale strengthens the foundation for the last push.

Now more than ever, science is on the side of India's HIV/AIDS elimination vision. India's vibrant biotechnology and pharmaceutical industry can fast track development and a scale-up of drugs, vaccines, and diagnostics, providing the tail winds for the elimination efforts. Yet, in a journey of thousand miles, the last mile is always the hardest.

The last mile for ending HIV AIDS as a public health threat is not just biomedical. It is also social, digital, behavioural, and structural. NACP-VI provides a forward-looking road map that is technologically modern, epidemiologically precise, and socially grounded. Underpinned by unwavering government commitment and a resilient public health system, India will ride stridently on the opportunity to show the world that ending an epidemic is possible when science, community, and policy move together.

Hekali Zhimomi is Additional Secretary and Director General, National AIDS Control Organization (NACO), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India
