Category: Editorial
Title: Enter core inflation Part Two

Enter core inflation

These antecedents are important. Core inflation on average accounted for just 30% of the entrenched overall inflation, descended with alarming speed within one year to ~3.1% by mid-2024. Since January 2023, its pace is sober  -  an average 4.2% against a long-term 5.2%. Prolonged disinflation and the wait for a durable decline in headline inflation prompted internal MPC disagreement on the mounting growth sacrifice, ignited debate on headline's relevance as inflation target in food shock-prone economies, while the RBI  -  which only completed a 250-bps, catch-up tightening in nine months (May 2022-February 2023)  -  confronted a difficult trade-off.

These remind that the old headache, food inflation  -  critical to inflation targeting's adoption to anchor expectations  -  has returned to the centre of monetary policy, necessitating refinement of supply-shock treatment under the framework. CIF, the underlying trend inflation to which headline returns after shocks subside, fits here with careful communication and, possibly, improved policy outcomes as output losses are minimised. The RBI's assessment is that core is relatively stable against headline volatilities, with H converging to C in the long run.

This contrasts with C-to-H convergence back in 2013-14. We must also reckon with the exceptional significance of wide-ranging, stringent supply measures  -  trade policy, direct agriculture market interventions, fuel tax adjustments, etc. -  in the H-C dynamics in the high-inflation years of 2019-24.

The extent and timing of these is unpredictable; fiscal risks spill over to bond yields. Against this, markets may infer implicit response scenarios, decoding what the RBI's policy rate path implies about different inflation measures. In instances of wide divergence, a comparison of dual inflation projections to discern the operative reaction function is not impossible.

Crucially, if both forecasts are widely off the mark, it can be difficult for markets to anchor on either. An illustration is the sharp monetary policy turn  - two-step, 90-bps tightening  - in May-June 2022: a month before, inflation was projected falling from 6.3% in April-June by 50-, 40-, and 30-bps in the subsequent quarters, and 5.7% in 2022- 23 without monetary action. Actual headline accelerated to 7.0 and 8% in March-April 2022, while core rose to 6.5 and 8%.

In June 2022, the upward quarterly forecast revisions were a staggering 120-, 160-, 80-, and 70-bps respectively, with annual inflation marked up 100-bps, 6.7%. This emphasises forecasting difficulties in different supply shocks  -  food or fuel-cum-input prices passthroughs to core with generalisation; the risks of possible underweighting in the baseline, the transmission process, and disinflationary impact of multiple, simultaneous supply actions of indeterminate quantum and timing outside the RBI's control. In the present context, i.e.

Gulf shock, the third case  -  cost-push price pressures passed on by private sellers with or without fuel price adjustments by government  -  is particularly relevant. The price-cum-supply shock transmission to core via input costs, wages, and transport to prices of other goods and services could undermine the look-through rationale from the outset. This would question reliability of the demand signal as H and C both move in the same direction, creating ambiguity about monetary policy responses and market uncertainty about the relative weight assigned to core.

Has the genie been let out of the bag at the wrong time? Written by Renu Kohli The author is a Senior Fellow at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress
