Category: Editorial
Title: Epstein Files arent an island story They are Part One

Epstein Files aren't an 'island story'. They are about the nature of collective power

Story'. They are about the nature of collective power The files provide a sobering X-ray of some of America's elites: Immature, full of impunity, corrupt, venal, venial, and venereal all at once. They also provide a sobering view of global politics: There are no grand purposes, not even a political economy It is perhaps not an accident that an island figures prominently in the horrifically appalling Epstein scandal.

The scandal, which now implicates a wide section of America's elites, brings together one fantasy of modernity and one of its most atrocious moral horrors. Islands have often been the places where modernity has staged its worst delusions. In the Enlightenment, islands were spaces where one could safely escape all moral norms and sexual prohibitions; they promised unlimited indulgence, but one that did not imperil mainstream society, precisely because they were exceptional and offshore.

But the image of exceptional relaxation of norms, "offshoring", applies to financial crimes too: A form of evasion that does not imperil the system as a whole. Offshoring crime, sexual violence, indulgence and financial perfidy is threatening but also reassuring. After all, it is offshore. This was, of course, always a delusion.

Financial offshoring is not a peripheral matter; it magnifies the crimes of the financial centre. Similarly, elite actors thought they could carry out their worst desires without contaminating the centre. What those who came into Jeffrey Epstein's orbit were enacting was not a fantasy of freedom, a revolt against prohibitions or norms.

What they were enacting was an aspect of the horrific logic of modernity: An extraordinary pornification of the imagination, sexual exploitation and commodification of bodies, and total abjection in the pursuit of power. And it is an elite that seems to combine violent impunity with emotional immaturity. There are too many angles to the Epstein files.

Have all the files been released? Will the victims' rights be protected? Given that both Democrats and Republicans are implicated, who stands to benefit? The files provide a sobering X-ray of some of America's elites: Immature, full of impunity, corrupt, venal, venial, and venereal all at once. They also provide a sobering view of global politics: There are no grand purposes, not even a political economy.

Instead, what we get is a world run by huckstering middlemen, vulnerable personalities, fragile egos, the perfect embodiment of Spengler's figures of moral decline: Clever, sceptical, but licentious and morally exhausted. What decisions are such immature and fragile men capable of? The puzzle is how Epstein managed to put himself at the centre of so much geopolitics; the fact that so many global powers felt they had to go through him is remarkable.

He comes across as both a figure of great evil and an agony aunt for the powerful, including powerful countries. The reaction will play out over time. Who knows what skeletons will tumble out? But, as always, the response is revealing. There was initial reluctance to confront the matter in both political parties, and it has taken years, and legislation introduced by Thomas Massie and Ro Khanna, to get the release of the files moving.

Yet there is still, arguably, a shroud of silence. Yes, there is gossip and chatter, but it is almost a way of not confronting the central question: How could a society produce an elite of this kind? Imagine if this kind of story had broken about the ruling class of any other country. Every colonial trope of debauchery or orientalism would have shaped the coverage.
