Category: Editorial
Title: Epstein Files arent an island story They are Part Two

Epstein Files aren't an 'island story'. They are about the nature of collective power

But the response is revealing in three deeper ways. First, though there is partisan bickering, there is still a kind of attempt to exceptionalise the behaviour of this ruling class. Like earlier colonial and island imaginaries, it functions as a bounded zone in which elite actors could suspend norms without contaminating the moral order of the centre.

Second, there is a pathology of modern political life, where power is not legitimised or justified through virtue, but through opacity, brazenness, legalese, propaganda and procedural shenanigans. So much energy will go into legalese when the horrors are in plain sight. Third, there is a shadow that haunts modernity.

The only great historians who let us grasp this moment are the Romans: Tacitus, Sallust, and Livy. They located sexual decadence and violence at the visible centre of power, treating excess as a sign, and in some cases, a cause of political decline. We moderns, of course, are supposedly more sophisticated.

We distinguish between public and private. For us, corruption is not about virtue; it is a matter of institutional containment. The historian and theorist of the politics of virtue, JGA Pocock, in The Machiavellian Moment, cautioned about a paradox at the heart of modernity: Unlike the Romans, we do not think decadence, especially sexual decadence, tells us much about the decay of societies.

Usually, the causes are structural  - economic or political. Yet the republican category of virtue survives. It may not have explanatory force, but we cannot entirely abandon the language of virtue, or the sneaking suspicion that, even if sexual decadence is not causal, it is revealing. There are, of course, gradations in the Epstein files that need to be sorted out  - people who committed crimes in legal terms, people who engaged in morally reprehensible behaviour, and people who themselves are not individually guilty but condoned the whole structure of power and knowledge that pushed shame aside.

The Epstein files are not about individual guilt or innocence; they are about the nature of collective power. And when that collective power displays elites aligning sexual, financial, legal, political, and even intellectual power with shame and impunity, one has to wonder whether the Roman historians were onto something: They imagined empires collapsing when elites could no longer restrain themselves on any dimension. An elite so needy, greedy, and now so vulnerable can hardly be trusted to exercise good judgment.

The dilemma, as the Romans knew, is this: An elite of this kind has no authority left. Even in power, it is fearful; who knows what violence it enacts to cover its own tracks? On the other hand, if the elite gets away with it, the road is open to moral nihilism, a point we are dangerously close to reaching.

Written by: Pratap Bhanu Mehta The writer is contributing editor, The Indian Express
