Category: Editorial
Title: Europe is getting hotter And air Part Two

Europe is getting hotter. And air conditioners are not the answer

Reducing the use of private cars in cities and consequently reducing the area covered by concrete and asphalt, while using these spaces for landscaping, can also help. In the city of Eindhoven, a couple of years ago, the whole inner ring road was redesigned and relayed to reduce car traffic, increase the green canopy and water-permeable green areas, and encourage cycling and walking. The ring road has turned into a kind of ring park.

Encouraging the transition from fossil-fuel-powered to electric vehicles through subsidies and regulations is another way of tackling the root cause of climate change. In the Netherlands, many cities have restricted access to electric vehicles only (not only cars but also trucks). Cooling in buildings is achieved by passive means such as shading, cross-ventilation, and green roofs and walls.

Regulatory measures in several European cities set legally binding carbon-emissions targets for new buildings, thereby reducing future urban heat. Finally, rainwater harvesting and using this water in different ways to reduce ambient temperatures in public spaces are also being promoted. It is encouraging to see that most cities in Europe have not opted for the large-scale use of air-conditioning since this will only exacerbate the situation.

Most cities are taking both short-and long-term measures in such a way that their actions will provide comfort to their citizens while reinforcing the effort to reduce climate change. There is also a realization that high urban temperatures are also an equality issue. To quote from the Heat Ready London report, "Research shows that the hardest-hit Londoners are those living in poorly designed homes; those without access to green space; and those with greater health risks." Addressing the urban heat issue is thus rightly seen as an issue of environmental injustice.

By Shyam Khandekar The writer is an urban designer, city planner and architect, and co-founder of the knowledge platform MyLiveableCity
