Category: Editorial
Title: Explained The many benefits of replacing Part One

Explained: The many benefits of replacing paper notes with plastic ones

Of replacing paper notes with plastic ones The RBI is reviving trials of polymer currency notes after 15 years. Here's how plastic notes last longer, improve security and could reduce printing costs But what's the need to replace paper notes  -  which are made of paper made by using 100% cotton  -  with plastic ones? Are there any actual benefits?

As it turns out, there are many. The 2012 trials In September 2009  -  seven years after it said there was no proposal to introduce plastic notes  -  the RBI invited bids to procure 100 crore pieces of Rs 10-notes. These notes were to be introduced for a field trial in Kochi, Mysuru, Shimla, Jaipur and Bhubaneswar  -  different climatic zones that would test the resilience of the notes.

The trial, however, went nowhere. "Though we had envisaged a trial of plastic notes in 2012/13, it remained a plan only," a former central bank official told The Indian Express. "No decision had then been taken to proceed for procurement." In its annual report for 2014-15, the RBI said that while the Rs 10 plastic notes were technically evaluated, "certain technical infirmities emerged and the process could not be taken further".

The project was then taken up by BRBNMPL and the Security Printing and Minting Corporation of India Ltd (SPMCIL). But there had been next-to-nothing on that front. Now, as last week's tender revealed, BRBNMPL and SPMCIL will be the ones who will print the notes using the polymer sheets supplied to them.

Global adoption Even in 2009 or 2012, India would have been late to the plastic note party. First issued by Australia in 1988, plastic banknotes are now used in more than 50 countries and are widely considered to be far superior to paper ones. Among developed countries, the likes of the UK, Canada, and New Zealand use polymer notes.

And as Indian tourists would know, even our close neighbours such as Thailand, Vietnam, Malaysia and Singapore use plastic currency, albeit not exclusively. Plastic actually helps the environment The biggest advantage plastic notes provide over paper notes is that they are far more durable, lasting anywhere between two to six times longer depending on the denomination of the note (small denomination notes are handled more frequently, which reduces their life). And this longer life is the source of nearly all the benefits.

One, a longer life means fewer plastic notes need to be manufactured over any period of time. Two, printing fewer notes reduces costs related to making them -  even though one plastic note is more expensive to make than a paper one  - distributing them and destroying them. And the elimination of these costs has a favourable impact on the environment.

Back in August 2013, the RBI had said it had asked The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) to conduct a study on the carbon footprint of cotton-based currency notes and plastic ones over their entire lifetime. This 'Life Cycle Impact Assessment' came to the conclusion that replacing cotton-based notes with plastic ones would have "significant environmental benefits". "Polymer/plastic banknotes (and the waste from production) can be granulated and recycled into useful plastic products such as compost bins, plumbing fittings and other household and industrial products.
