Category: Editorial
Title: Explained The many benefits of replacing Part Two

Explained: The many benefits of replacing paper notes with plastic ones

The base material of polymer is a non-renewable resource, but due to its recyclability, it has more than one life," the RBI had said. Money and numbers In the last three years, the RBI supplied 8,270 crore pieces of new currency notes. Over the same period, it destroyed 6,213 crore pieces of old notes because they were far too dirty or torn to be used.

As such, for every four new notes that the RBI sends out into the economy every year, it has to destroy three old ones. Plastic notes, on account of their longer life, will not have to be destroyed so regularly. This not only saves the RBI money but also reduces the impact on the environment. RBI's cost of printing currency The RBI currently spends thousands of crores every year to print currency notes.

Just over the last decade, the central bank has spent Rs 52,095 crore in total to print nearly 26,000 crore pieces of notes. While this is a big sum in itself, it is large even for the RBI, which routinely deals in thousands of crores. In fact, over the last 10 years, the cost of printing paper notes has accounted for anywhere between 15-44% of the RBI's total expenditure, excluding provisions.

Then there is the security advantage. According to British firm De La Rue, which supplies notes to more than half of all central banks, plastic notes are more secure as most counterfeit notes are produced on paper. As such, counterfeit rates have fallen in countries where currency notes are made of polymer.

In India, the number of counterfeit notes detected in 2025-26 rose to 2.3 lakh pieces, up from 2.17 lakh in 2024-25. Cash is still king But does India even require a shift to plastic notes considering the digital revolution that has occurred in the last 10 years or so, spurred by demonetisation and the Covid-19 pandemic? As it turns out, Indians are demanding cash at rates matching those before demonetisation, with an RBI survey last year indicating "continued strong preference for usage of cash" by households and small retailers.

Cash demand rising As at the end of March 2026, the total amount of currency in circulation in India was Rs 41.7 lakh crore, up 12% year-on-year. So, while digital payments are on the up and growing rapidly, demand for cash isn't going anywhere. Import concerns Despite all the positives of plastic notes, one issue remains: the possibility that India may end up having to import the sheets that are used to print banknotes.

While the tender expressly said bidders must ensure that their operations in Pakistan or China, if any, must be "suitably firewalled" from those in India, no raw materials be procured from these two countries, and that no employee who has previously worked or been posted or is citizen or person with origins in these countries be engaged for the India project, depending on a foreign entity for your legal tender is a vulnerability. This, however, wouldn't be a first. The RBI has gradually reduced its import of paper and ink needed to make notes, with Bank Note Paper Mill India Pvt Ltd -  a joint venture between BRBNMPL and SPMCIL  -  starting domestic production of watermarked paper around a decade ago.

In August 2018, BRBNMPL's ink factory in Mysuru became operational. Given these existing facilities, any shift to plastic must be gradual for two reasons. One, considerable investment has already been made. Two, more investment will be required for the plastic transition. By Siddharth Upasani
