Category: Editorial
Title: Fairness not speed must drive quick commerce

Fairness, not speed, must drive quick commerce

Indian cities are experiencing not only escalating temperature, but also a growing demand for quick commerce as the summer intensifies. Indian cities are experiencing not only escalating temperature, but also a growing demand for quick commerce as the summer intensifies. Consumers are demanding the delivery of groceries, medicine and other day-to-day needs within minutes.

The promise of instant fulfilment at the touch of a button has changed the habits of consumers, who feel that going out in this heat is a burden. This increase d dep endence on convenience fuelled by demand for faster delivery raises concerns, particularly for delivery riders. This summer is a test of endurance for delivery riders.

They navigate through blazing heat, racing against time. They are subjected to direct sunlight, hot winds and traffic pollution. A majority of them handle multiple deliveries in an hour; this may lead to dehydration, heat exhaustion, fatigue, and even heatstroke in severe situations. Protective gear such as helmets and uniforms adds to the discomfort.

In some of the dark stores and warehouses, access to basic amenities such as shaded rest areas, drinking water or medical support is inconsistent. This necessitates a paradigm shift for the quick commerce industry  -  to shift from a fast to a fair mode. They can redesign their systems focusing on the riders' health and safety especially in this hot weather.

This may involve the supply of cooling gear, hydration kits, minimum rest periods, and fair compensation. They can also provide heat-sensitive routing in their delivery apps, which automatically reroutes orders when temperatures exceed safe thresholds. These actions could ensure that the delivery riders are recognized with dignity and care, rather than as cogs in a logistics unit.

Consumers can also responsibly contribute to this scenario through a slight shift in their expectations. They can make a difference by accepting delayed delivery times during the extreme weather conditions. There is no need to skip convenience, but instead they can temper it through consciousness. Although the urban economy is incomplete without gig workers, there lies a gap between their economic importance and their exclusion from safety and welfare provisions.

This gap needs to be bridged by revising the labour policy to categorically include them. At a policy level, this breakthrough necessitates the establishment of explicit rules to implement heat action plans for gig workers. India has already taken an important step through the Code on social security, 2020 which formally recognizes delivery riders as gig and platform workers and envisages access to social security benefits.

Yet, they are not granted employee status. State-level efforts such as the Rajasthan platform-based gig workers (Registration and Welfare) Act, 2023 pioneered a structured approach for regulating engagement of gig workers by establishing welfare boards to support them. Taking a cue from Rajasthan, a few other Indian states like Karnataka, Jharkhand, and Bihar have also moved towards enacting similar laws focused on registration, social security, and welfare boards for platform-based workers.

Karnataka introduced the Platform-Based Gig Workers (Social Security and Welfare) Bill during 2024/2025. Telangana has also drafted the Telangana Gig and Platform Workers Bill (2025) and is set to join the list of states with legislation to regulate working conditions for gig workers. The policy space is unevenly implemented across India.

Building on such models, other Indian states could also incorporate heat-index based advisories to protect gig worker health. Through this, India can move closer to a system where the speed of service does not outpace safety and health. The future of quick commerce will be defined by its ability to strike a balance between efficiency and responsibility.

The summer is a grim reminder that the ability to become technologically competent is impossible without compelling human resilience. Thus, in the blaze of rising demand, the path forward is not faster, but fairer. By A P SRIVIDHYA AND J PAUL MANSINGH (The writers are, respectively, Research Scholar, Agribusiness Management, and a Professor, VIT University, Vellore.)
