Category: Editorial
Title: Fifty years after abolition in India bonded Part Two

Fifty years after abolition in India, bonded labour endures

Many victims are young: Those under 18 constitute 39 per cent of the total victims rescued. Though the formal record of the crime of HT with the police is seen for sexual exploitation, the "others" category requires further explanation. Sixty-two per cent of the victims rescued from HT in 2024 were adults.

Of these, 38 per cent were men. The nature of HT in India affects men, women, and young children, and the interventions designed at various levels of the justice system need to be mindful of these realities. In 2016, the Ministry of Labour & Employment declared a vision to release and rehabilitate 1.84 crore victims of bonded labour.

Between 2015 and 2025, across around 14 states and Union Territories, 16,428 persons were reported to have been released and rehabilitated under the 2021 Central Sector Rehabilitation Scheme for Bonded Labourers (CSS BLR Scheme). This figure is low compared to the rescues of victims of forced labour trafficking reported in the media and the NCRB during the same period. The May 2026 Supreme Court judgment in the Prajwala case is a significant victory for anti-HT advocates.

It places victims at the centre of the justice system, acknowledging that rescue alone is not enough. The absence of a robust "victim protection plan" carries a realistic risk of rendering any rescue effort an abortive exercise from the outset. Time-bound rehabilitation support to victims of trafficking, such as immediate cash assistance, medical help, trauma counselling, recovery of unpaid wages and related legal compensations, protection of victims and their families from harassment by perpetrators, is critical to make rescue meaningful.

Many good laws are already in place to protect vulnerable groups like women, children and members of Scheduled Castes and Tribes. But the proof of their effectiveness will be in measurable progress across states in terms of rescue from bondage, supported by release certificates from the district administration under the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976. Additionally, the value of the CSS BLR Scheme lies in the provision of a minimum corpus fund of Rs 10 lakh in districts for disbursement of immediate cash assistance to victims.

Citizens have a fundamental right to be protected against HT. Both destination and source states can therefore support the immediate and long-term needs of victims of bonded labour. Access to entitlements such as rations, housing, skill development, employment and education for children is a basic support required for these families to restore them to real freedom.

By Tina Kuriakose Jacob The writer is Consultant and Senior Research Fellow with The International Institute for Migration Development (IIMAD)
