Category: Editorial
Title: Food vs fuel Time to recalibrate Part Two

Food vs fuel: Time to recalibrate

The government is already using maize as a primary feedstock for ethanol. Although maize production has been growing rapidly over the last decade or so, our productivity levels hover around 3.5 tonnes per hectare, way below in the US (11 tonnes/ha) for instance. Its further use for ethanol without commensurate increase in production will put pressure on prices of maize and in turn of poultry meat, eggs, and milk as it has been the main feed.

Thus, shifting from sugar to rice or maize does not eliminate the food-fuel trade-off. The only way to generate large surpluses of maize is by raising its productivity. Would India allow genetically modified maize, which drives US yields? The third response could be either to directly import ethanol, when domestic supplies are putting pressure on food prices, or reduce the blending from 20% to 15% or so.

The deeper lesson is that India's ethanol programme needs a rethink and recalibration. We need to know what is the net energy balance with different feedstocks. Instead of rigidly allocating ethanol from sugar, rice, or maize, oil marketing companies could have greater flexibility to choose the most economical source, subject to safeguards for food security, farmers, and the environment.

The government should focus on strategic buffers and food-security safeguards, and not manage every feedstock allocation. The immediate response is clear: bring in enough sugar to rebuild the stock cushion, temporarily shift ethanol away from sugar, use FCI grains only when there is a genuine surplus, and retain imported ethanol as a safety valve. Maize-based ethanol would save water and be more benign to the environment, but we need to invest more to raise its productivity.

India's ethanol programme has made major strides, and going from 5% blending in 2019-20 to 20% in 2025-26 is placing a huge demand for its feedstocks. Overall, fuel self-reliance should never force a choice between food and fuel. Atmanirbharta in fuel must strengthen, not undermine, India's food security; food must remain the higher-order priority.

We hope the Modi government will do a 360-degree evaluation of its ethanol programme, and recalibrate its policy design so that it does not push up food prices. By Ashok Gulati & Tanmoy Adhikari, Respectively Distinguished Professor and Research Assistant at ICRIER
