Category: Editorial
Title: For green transition India can fall back on Part Two

For green transition, India can fall back on itself

Two, should the lack of external assistance dissuade us? The uncertainty about international public flows being provided on the scale that developing countries wanted does not mean that India will not be able to finance a transition towards net zero. This is because COP discussions have focused on the financial needs of all developing countries, and in this context have naturally emphasised the need for concessional financing from the budgets of developed countries.

Such funds are very scarce, and they are most likely to be prioritised for the least developed countries. Given the size of India's economy and its growing sophistication, we will be expected to mobilise most of the additional investment needed from domestic sources. There will be a need for external financing, which could come in the form of a combination of foreign private flows (debt plus FDI) and non-concessional public flows (bilateral and multilateral development bank, or MDB, lending).

There is no dearth of private capital in world markets for bankable projects. Fortunately, the Indian private sector has demonstrated its ability to develop and implement such projects. The way to increase the potential flow of capital is to undertake a range of domestic policy reforms. The most important thing is to ensure that the electricity distribution companies  - the main buyers in the electricity market  -  are financially viable.

This requires reform of the state distribution companies, combined with selective privatisation, as some states are now doing. These steps need to be supported by reform of the regulatory system to allow greater variability in pricing, at both the wholesale and consumer levels. Foreign private investors may also need a legal framework in which state-investor disputes can be resolved quickly.

This is an issue that is relevant for FDI flows in general, and it is one of the key items on the FTA negotiations' agenda. We conclude that India's ability to transform its energy system does not depend on the availability of large volumes of external concessional finance. What is more important is for the established MDBs to expand the availability of long-term lending and perhaps also redirect more of it to support a much larger inflow of private capital through various forms of risk sharing and credit enhancement mechanisms.

COP meetings have typically underplayed the importance of MDBs in climate-related flows. Admittedly, the relevant forum for MDB-related issues is the G20. The recent G20 summit in South Africa did not do much. US President Donald Trump did not attend, and the other developed country members were content to adopt a low profile.

However, the next G20 summit will be hosted by the US. We should try to use that meeting to provide appropriate signals to the MDBs to leverage larger volumes of private capital to support the energy transition. By Montek S Ahluwalia & Utkarsh Patel Ahluwalia is former deputy chairman of the erstwhile Planning Commission, and distinguished fellow at the Centre for Social & Economic Progress (CSEP).

Patel is fellow at CSEP. Views are personal
