Category: Editorial
Title: For governments reform drive to succeed Part Two

For government's reform drive to succeed, rationalise agri subsidies

It helped to reduce massive leakages in PDS. But how rational is giving free food to 56 per cent of the population, when, according to the World Bank's extreme poverty criteria  -  $3 per capita/day/in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms at 2021 prices  -  India's poverty came down to just 5.3 per cent of the population in 2022? Even at a higher poverty line of $4.2/per capita/day, poverty in India was about 24 per cent.

One can argue that the extremely poor need to be given free food (antyodaya). Viewed from this perspective, only about 5 per cent of the country's population needs free food, while others should pay at least half of the MSP. If not, then this policy is nothing but the biggest political revdi (dole) the government is giving consumers for votes.

It gives free rice even to rice growers. This is irrational as these rice growers first give all their paddy to the government and get back free rice with enhanced economic cost and subsidy. How can one reform this system? Scale down the coverage gradually from the current level of about 56 per cent of the population to 40 per cent, then to 25 per cent, and finally to about 15 per cent.

If it does not have the political courage to do so, the government should at least embark on direct cash transfers to rice and wheat producers. Further, convert at least 20 per cent of FPS into nutrition hubs, which have pulses, oilseeds, milk, eggs, fruits and vegetables, which are more nutritious than just wheat and rice. Beneficiaries can be given coupons to buy more diversified food.

Now, let us turn to the fertiliser subsidy. It is the second largest subsidy (about Rs 2 trillion) in the Union budget, and bigger than the entire budget of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare (MoAFW) (Rs 1.37 trillion). The excessive subsidy for urea amounts to subsidising toxins. Urea is not being used in a balanced manner  -  the excessive use of phosphatic (P) and potassic (K) fertilisers is contaminating groundwater and increasing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.

A sizeable part (20 to 25 per cent) also leaks away. The solution is direct cash transfers to farmers and decontrolling fertiliser pricing. If the government can't do that immediately, it can at least bring urea under the nutrient-based subsidy (NBS) and give the same subsidy as on DAP and MOP. Also, shift the fertiliser subsidy from the Department of Fertilisers to MoAFW, which deals with farmers directly.

If both food and fertiliser subsidies can be merged with the augmented PM Kisan scheme, the Modi government is really in "Reform Express" mode. By Ashok Gulati Gulati is distinguished professor at ICRIER. Views are personal
