Category: Editorial
Title: Four years on India must realise On Part One

Four years on, India must realise: On Russia-Ukraine war, a hands- off strategy is not ideal

On Russia-Ukraine war, a hands-off strategy is not ideal The ongoing war has exceeded the duration of Russia's involvement in the Great Patriotic War (World War II), which lasted 1,417 days No battle ever takes place as it was conceived or calculated. War is not courtesy, but the vilest thing in life, and we must understand this and not play at war. War is an organised killing -  Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace The words of Leo Tolstoy, the most famous literary figure from Russia, capture the enormity, complexity, and unintended consequences of war.

February 24, 2026, marks the fourth anniversary of the Russia-Ukraine war, but peace remains elusive as ever. It has turned into a war of attrition with little substantial gains for anyone. The ongoing war has exceeded the duration of Russia's involvement in the Great Patriotic War (World War II), which lasted 1,417 days.

In World War II, the Soviet Union achieved a decisive victory over Nazi Germany and emerged as a superpower. But Russia is unlikely to achieve anything substantial from this war. Russia started the war with three primary objectives: Prohibiting Ukraine from joining NATO, protecting its Russian-speaking population in the Donbas region, and installing a favourable regime in Kyiv.

Moscow expected a short, swift war that would force President Volodymyr Zelenskyy to either exit or surrender. But as it turns out, it was a mighty miscalculation. With European backing, the Ukrainian regime continues to resist Russian military advances even after four years of gruelling war. Moscow might have succeeded in halting Ukraine from joining NATO, but the fact that two neutral states, Sweden and Finland, joined NATO means that Russia's insecurity persists unabated.

Finland has a 1,343- kilometre border with Russia, where NATO forces will be permanently deployed for an indefinite period. For political purposes, Russia can claim victory by showcasing roughly 20 per cent of Ukrainian territory, which includes Crimea, Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhia, under its control. But what matters for Russia is not territory, but long-term border security and strategic balance.

With new territorial acquisitions, Russia will not acquire the elusive deterrence and security it seeks. Moreover, juxtaposed with Russia's massive military, economic, and reputational losses, the territorial gains appear insignificant. The exact figures may never be known, but Western sources present a figure of nearly 1,75,000 military deaths and many times more injuries.

Further, Russia's economy has been sanctioned and isolated from Western economies. It will take years for the normalisation of its ties with the West. Therefore, this war has yielded no significant dividends to Moscow. If Russia has failed to achieve its objectives, Europe has fared no better. Blinded by its idealism and moral authority, Europe presented it as a war between democracy and dictatorship and expected widespread international support.

But, barring a few states, the important countries of the Global South declined to take sides and treated it as a European war for geopolitical influence. The BRICS countries refused to condemn the Russian invasion and continued their economic ties with Moscow. Because of support from the Global South, Russia was able to withstand Western economic sanctions and outperform many European economies.

Ukraine entered the war relying solely on NATO's military and financial support. But wars of this magnitude are never waged on borrowed strength. Ukraine has lost nearly 20 per cent of its territory, six to seven million of its people have migrated to other countries, and an estimated 5,00,000 soldiers have suffered in terms of deaths and injuries.
