Category: Editorial
Title: From parched fields to prosperity Part Two

From parched fields to prosperity

Second, the best quality samplings were procured from diverse nurseries for different fruits. GVT bought saplings on a large scale helped them procure at `30/sapling, which was roughly half the retail price. Farmers were supplied these saplings at a subsidised price of Rs 15 each. The subsidy was provided through the corporate social responsibility (CSR) funding from various donors, most notably Motilal Oswal Foundation.

The Foundation donated `25 crores to build Krishikul's basic structure spread across 25 acres. It is used to carry out experiments for different crops and  train farmers rigorously on how to handle these new crops. Third, the water table in that area, which had receded to about 400 feet below surface level, was recharged through farm ponds, check dams, and most importantly, by putting in several (about 200) Global River Aquashafts - deep vertical recharge shafts constructed in low-lying riverbeds that channel excess surface water safely into underground aquifers.

By filtering silt and debris before percolation, these structures ensure efficient groundwater recharge without contamination. This helped raised groundwater level from 400 feet to about 50 feet at several places, enabling assured irrigation of these fruit crops. Fourth, banks were also roped in to provide credit to these farmers.

Their risk was covered by providing a first-loss default guarantee (FLDG) facility of `1 crore. The results of this strategy to implement the idea of augmenting farmers' incomes was unprecedented. Incomes soared 10 times, triggering economic transformation. But this is still a beginning of the journey and much more needs to be done.

One area is to move from being production-focussed to controlling the entire value chain and accessing the best domestic and global markets for each of these products. It requires aggregation, assaying, grading, packaging, pre-cooling, cold storages, reefer vans, and even processing facilities to add value and stabilise prices of fresh fruit. The target has to be that member farmers must get at least 60% of the consumer's money spent on these products.

Today, the farmers' share in the same hovers between 25% and 33%. So, there is still scope to increase farmers' incomes further once GVT dives deeper into marketing these products directly. A charitable organisation like the GVT can demonstrate the proof of concept, which they have already done at some scale.

Taking it forward to an all-India movement requires the government to step in with large resources, more expertise, and policy changes wherever needed to scale it up under a Centre-state-non-government organisation-business partnership. We hope that the Modi government can undertake it and realise its unfulfilled dream of not just doubling farmers' incomes but augmenting it manyfold. By Ashok Gulati & Ishita Mandla, respectively distinguished professor and research fellow, ICRIER Disclaimer: The views expressed are the author's own and do not reflect the official policy or position of Financial Express.
