Category: Editorial
Title: Fullblown conflict in West Asia Part Two

Full-blown conflict in West Asia

The US strikes on an oil-rich region are the second time this is happening this year. In January, the operations to capture Venezuela's President, Nicolas Maduro, did not impact oil prices very much as the country accounted for less than 1% of global oil production. West Asia is far more important, and Iranian drone attacks have resulted in shutdowns of Saudi Aramco's 550,000-barrel-a- day Ras Tanura facility and Qatar's liquefied natural gas production, impacting prices.

Earlier episodes include drone strikes on September 14, 2019, that targeted oil processing facilities at Abqaiq and Khurais in eastern Saudi Arabia, cut the kingdom's oil production by about half - representing 5% of global oil production - and destabilised oil markets. The outlook on global oil prices could be much worse if US-Israeli strikes also disrupt Iran's oil production as it is the fourth-largest Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) producer, generating 3.37 million barrels per day in 2025. Disruption would straightaway take out 4.2% of global crude supplies.

The shutdown of the Strait of Hormuz, through which a fifth of global seaborne traded oil flows daily, is likely to keep oil prices on the boil. In this milieu, OPEC and its allies agreed to only a modest oil output boost to calm nervous markets as it has little spare capacity to add to supply, except for its leader Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates which will also struggle to export oil until navigation in the Gulf returns to normal. All of this indicates that the outlook on oil prices is clearly predicated on whether the conflict will soon end or will be a more protracted affair.

With the former, oil prices will resume trending to lower levels like they have been doing last year or spike dangerously upwards with the latter. A de-escalation of the conflict is the best outcome for West Asia to return to normalcy. A diplomatic off-ramp is necessary to break the spiral of intensifying US-Israeli strikes and retaliation by Iran that engulfs the region in conflict.

Written by N Chandra Mohan The writer is an economic and business commentator based in New Delhi.
