Category: Editorial
Title: Fullblown conflict in West Asia Part One

Full-blown conflict in West Asia

As it is the premier oil-rich region, the impact on prices obviously depend on how quickly the US-Israeli attacks on Iran end or whether there is a more prolonged escalation West Asia, the world's leading oil-producing region, is at war on several fronts. Following the massive US-Israeli air strikes on Iran since last Saturday, Tehran has retaliated with a barrage of medium-range ballistic missile and drone strikes targeting US bases in Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait, and of course Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. The US embassies in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait were hit in a drone attack, prompting an advisory for all Americans to leave countries across the region.

As if all of this weren't serious enough, Israel is striking Lebanon to target Iran's proxy group, Hezbollah. All of this makes for a full-blown conflict in the region. The big question naturally is whether it will soon blow over with dialogue and diplomacy or escalate further in the weeks ahead. The imponderables in this regard largely pertain to US President Donald Trump's lack of clarity on the objectives of striking Iran.

In the first formal Pentagon briefing since the conflict began, US Defence Secretary Peter Hegseth stated that the military's sole objective was to destroy Iran's ability to project power beyond its borders, which it had been using to provide cover to develop a nuclear weapon. But how can Tehran develop this weapon when Trump claimed its nuclear facilities were totally "obliterated" by US bunker-busting bombs last year? In negotiations with the US, too, Iran insisted that it will never build a bomb but needed nuclear enrichment only for generating power.

Trump, for his part, is fixated on regime change. But what does regime change entail despite the US taking out Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the nation's supreme leader, besides top officials of the defence establishment? In a telephonic interview to the New York Times, Trump offered contradictory visions on how power might be transferred.

For starters, there could be a Venezuela-type situation in which only the top leader is removed in a military strike but the rest of the government remains in place that is willing to work pragmatically with the US. Another scenario is for the hardened officers of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps to hand over their weapons to the Iranian populace. Trump has also been urging the citizenry to take over the government, "when we are finished".

The Iranians are showing no signs of backing down or capitulating to Trump's surprise. Instead they are preparing for a long war that will impose costs on US allies and interests across the region. But they have so far inflicted only a limited number of casualties on the US amidst the loss of several F-15 fighter jets over Kuwait due to so-called friendly fire.

If they are able to raise the body count in the days ahead - especially as Trump has not ruled out putting boots on the ground - the calculation is that the US will look for a way to end the ongoing conflict. This is another way of stating that Trump always chickens out. Diplomacy then will perhaps give a much better deal to the Iranians than negotiating under fire which he desires.
