Category: Editorial
Title: Gauging the services sector Part One

Gauging the services sector

Building an index of service production will be difficult but it will be a welcome addition A significant trend in the economic and cultural changes in the last few decades is the increasing importance of the services sector. At present, the services sector is the primary source of global wealth generation. It has transformed the dynamics of economic growth through employment opportunities and exports.

The nature of the services sector, too, has witnessed a major transformation in this century. With services offered electronically, consulting, software, and research and development can now be immediately exported to anywhere worldwide. From 2005 onwards, there has been a nearly threefold increase in the export of services.

The present contribution of the services sector to global GDP is around two-thirds, rising to more than three-fourths in developed countries like the US. Certainly, India's GDP maintains an equilibrium between agriculture, manufacturing, and services, with agriculture sustaining the rural economy, manufacturing picking pace, and services driving growth. Yet, the services sector has rewritten the conventional approach to development in India as well.

Around 54% of India's GDP and 56.4% of gross value added (GVA) are generated by the services sector at present. India's services sector exports have risen from $53 billion in 2005 to $338 billion in 2023, rising at a pace twice that of the rest of the world, according to a Goldman Sachs' report published in 2024. Further, it has expanded more than India's material exports.

Two recently published reports by NITI Aayog titled "India's Services Sector: Insights from Employment Trends and State Level Dynamics" and "India's Services Sector: Insights from GVA Trends and State Level Dynamics" provide important insights. India's services sector has also emerged as a significant source of employment generation. In fact, employment in the sector has jumped to 29.7% in 2023-24 from 26.9% in 2011-12, adding around 40 million jobs over the preceding six years, thereby increasing service employment to 188 million, or roughly 30% of India's labour force.

Of course, India's employment proportion in services still lags behind the global average of around 50%, suggesting a gradual structural transition. The need to build an index of service production (ISP) was, in fact, felt before. A Technical Advisory Committee on Indices of Service Production (TAC-ISP) was constituted in 2004 and was subsequently reconstituted in 2010.

Since then, especially in this digital age, the nature of services has changed significantly. The ministry of statistics and programme implementation recently published an approach paper on compilation of the ISP for the formal sector of the economy, reflecting the growing importance of the services sector in the economy. Distinct from the index of industrial production (IIP), the ISP is a crucial, high-frequency economic indicator that quantifies the monthly volume of output in the services sector.

Undoubtedly, a monthly ISP that supplements the IIP would offer a more accurate view of the economy, facilitating improved analysis and policy development. The ISP is regularly published by a number of advanced economies. For instance, Eurostat began regularly publishing the ISP for the European Union and the Euro region in 2017.

The amount of service content in products, or the "servitisation" of economies, varies significantly, according to data. Similar indices can be found elsewhere as well. For instance, the UK compiles a comprehensive Monthly Index of Services, whereas South Korea publishes a monthly Service Industry Activity Index.
