Category: Editorial
Title: Gelephu Bhutans bet Indias gain Part One

Gelephu: Bhutan's bet, India's gain

Dia's gain Announced in December 2023 by King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, the mega Gelephu Mindfulness City (GMC) project is aimed at creating a transformative economic hub in southern Bhutan. For India, GMC is far more than a neighbouring infrastructure project. Situated close to the border with Assam, the initiative directly intersects with India's regional integration goals, security calculations, and economic ties in the Eastern Himalayas.

This project, under which an autonomous special administrative region (SAR) has been created, is spread over a vast area of 2,600 square km. Its primary objective is to develop the region as an economic hub and forge strong linkages with the global economy while taking care to preserve Bhutan's environment and cultural ethos. India strongly supports the initiative, recognising substantial strategic gains while countering growing Chinese influence in the region.

Earlier this month, when the Bhutanese king went for a visit to Gelephu along with Prime Minister Tshering Tobgay and Royal Bhutan Army's chief operations officer, Lieutenant General Batoo Tshering, to review the ongoing work, Indian ambassador Sandeep Arya accompanied the delegation. Key representatives from Indian agencies assisting Bhutan were also present, including the IMTRAT (Indian Military Training Team) commandant and the chief engineer of Dantak -- the overseas arm of India's Border Roads Organisation, which is executing crucial infrastructure projects in Bhutan. For India, the GMC project will enhance physical connectivity with its close neighbour, deepen economic linkages, and boost energy security through hydropower projects expected to come up there.

Crucially, it also signals to the world, especially China, how deeply intertwined India and Bhutan's strategic and economic interests remain. This comes as China continues to press Bhutan, with whom it shares a 477-km-long border, to develop bilateral ties. While Bhutan does not have formal diplomatic relations with China, it frequently faces Beijing's strong-arm tactics on boundary issues, including attempts to grab territory.

While Bhutan and China have been holding negotiations since 1984 to settle their boundary dispute, there has been no resolution yet. The Bhutan-China boundary dispute obviously has strategic and security implications for India. China, for instance, lays claim to Bhutan's Doklam plateau, which overlooks India's vulnerable Siliguri corridor connecting its northeast to the mainland.

The 73-day military standoff at Doklam in 2017 occurred when Indian troops stepped in to block the People's Liberation Army from extending a motorable track towards the strategic Jampheri Ridge there. With Bhutan remaining mindful of India's strategic interests, deep cooperation on the Gelephu project is a vital element of its outreach to Thimphu. The initiative will also help further consolidate India's linkages with the Himalayan kingdom that's been gradually working to shed its isolationist past.

While India remains its closest partner, Thimphu has been engaging with many more countries in an attempt to broad-base its foreign relations. Bhutan's past isolation stemmed not just from its rugged, landlocked mountainous terrain but also from a deliberate desire to preserve its culture, environment and sovereignty. However, modern economic realities in a globalised world and the aspirations of its people, especially the youth, are driving deeper engagement with the outside world.

Bhutan now has diplomatic relations with approximately 60 countries, though it remains wary of establishing formal diplomatic ties with the P5 countries. This shift marks a major evolution for a nation that transitioned from an absolute monarchy to a democratic constitutional monarchy only in 2008. While there is an elected government in Bhutan now, the Druk Gyalpo (Dragon King) commands immense respect and authority, making his personal backing of the GMC project pivotal.
