Category: Editorial
Title: Ghaziabad triple tragedy Australia banned Part Two

Ghaziabad triple tragedy: Australia banned social media for minors. India must follow its lead

Even more repulsive are the allegations from an ongoing US court filing, which has documented evidence from internal sources that the leadership of Meta knowingly exposed girls to sexual violence and human traffickers. While the companies also claim that children are already banned from their platforms, the age limit is as low as 13, and, incredibly, they don't even enforce any age verification. Unsurprisingly, it is estimated that nearly 40 per cent of 8- 12-year-olds in the US already use social media platforms like Instagram and Snapchat.

What Australia has done is to place the responsibility for verifying the age of its subscribers on the company and empowering parents to sue the companies if their children are found to have created accounts. As one might guess, the law has widespread support from parents. Suddenly, these companies have had to enforce age verification, indicating that they already had the capability to do so but deliberately furnished spurious reasons not to.

Many high-income countries, including the US, Australia, the UK, Japan, and South Korea, have witnessed a dramatic worsening of youth mental health in the past decade, a period during which smartphones and social media fused and took over children's lives. At the same time, the experience of loneliness in young people has surged in these countries. These are not coincidental findings, for loneliness is the direct result of spending less time with real friends compared to online ones.

This crisis has led many scholars and policymakers, including the former US Surgeon-General, to declare that social media is hurting young people and triggered a wave of lawsuits against the companies. And now, one country has imposed a ban. Important to note: This is not a ban on accessing the internet, for example, to watch videos or look up information; it is only a ban on opening a social media account.

As Jonathan Haidt, a noted scholar of this subject, observes, what the ban in Australia changes "is that some of the largest companies on earth can no longer form business relationships with young children or use their personal data to keep them hooked on feeds, likes, and alerts". While many countries are watching the fallout of Australia's action closely, India must take steps to implement such a ban immediately. First, even though smartphone penetration is rising rapidly, the ASER 2024 reports that only a third of rural adolescents under the age of 16 own a personal smartphone.

So, action now will not only protect future generations but also the majority of our children today. Second, there are already signs that mental health problems are worsening in young people, as evidenced by recent surveys observing high rates of emotional distress and one of the highest youth suicide rates in the world. And finally, our policymakers and development gurus keep trumpeting on about the country's youth dividend, referring to the enormous economic potential of our large population of young people; surely, they must not squander this simply to enrich tech companies.

Written by: Vikram Patel The writer is Paul Farmer Professor of Global Health at Harvard Medical School
