Category: Editorial
Title: Ghaziabad triple tragedy Australia banned Part One

Ghaziabad triple tragedy: Australia banned social media for minors. India must follow its lead

Australia banned social media for minors. India must follow its lead Algorithms engineered by the top social-media companies prioritise addictive engagement over children's safety. It is time India puts its youth before feeding the greed of tech companies The news of three minor sisters who took their lives in Ghaziabad, reportedly following conflict with their parents over their dependence on an online game, is a tragic reminder of the potential risks posed by video games and social media to children's mental health.

A few months ago, Australia became the first country to ban social media for children younger than 16. This is nothing short of a historic decision that puts the lives of children and their families ahead of the deception and greed of social-media companies. Several other countries around the world are preparing legislation similar to Australia's, and India needs to join this growing community of nations immediately.

There is now abundant evidence from internal documents and independent research that shows how algorithms engineered by the top social-media companies prioritise addictive engagement over children's safety, amplifying harms like anxiety, dissatisfaction with one's body or social life, and suicidal ideation. Numerous studies link heavy childhood social media use to increased risks of depression, anxiety, eating disorders, and self-harm, with effects strongest in preteens and early teens. Moreover, this addictive potential puts children in direct conflict with their parents because it takes over all aspects of their lives, not least their need to play, study, and sleep.

Why, one may ask, do social media's toxic effects only apply to children and adolescents? Quite simply, because the brain undergoes dramatic changes in its structure and function, which makes this period of life particularly vulnerable. The fact that our brains are exquisitely sensitive to our social environments coincides with the fact that adolescence is the phase in our life course when one is developmentally primed to compare oneself with and to model one's peers.

These features make the young person uniquely susceptible to the addictive potential of substances that trigger the brain's reward pathways. We have known this for decades, and this is why we impose age limits on alcohol and tobacco. What we now know is that these same reward pathways, which can lead to addiction, can also be triggered by social-media algorithms.

And the companies not only know this but deliberately mine this knowledge regardless of the damage they can cause. Tech companies have argued that denying children access to social media violates their rights to information, that the evidence on harm is weak, and, in any case, parents should take the responsibility to manage their children. Of course, this is exactly the playbook that the tobacco industry argued for decades, blaming smokers for their sickness and death rather than their product and rubbishing the large body of science through a formidable array of tactics, including, not surprisingly, bribing legislators.

This is also the playbook that the ultra-processed food and sugared beverage industries leverage as they profit from the fattening and sickening of an entire generation of children and young people, while big pharma profits from drugs to combat these man-made epidemics. Like tobacco and the food and beverage industry, social media companies know which features of their products can hook children, and they amplify them, for example, by continuing to optimise feeds for maximum dwell time and incorporating infinite scroll, which mimics slot machines. Platforms deploy AI-driven feeds that favour outrage, insecurity, and FOMO (fear of missing out) while generating billions in ad revenue.
