Category: Editorial
Title: Gig workers strike reveals intolerable Part One

Gig workers' strike reveals intolerable working conditions

While India lags in regulatory measures to alleviate their condition, these workers are fighting for the most basic safeguards and against hyper-exploitative models such as 10-minute deliveries that endanger lives On New Year's eve, one of the most lucrative days for app-based platforms, tens of thousands of platform workers across India chose to log out. For workers who live off daily earnings, shoulder debt, and have invested heavily in vehicles, fuel, and phones, this decision is not merely symbolic. It is existential.

When workers struggling to meet basic needs give up a peak-demand day, it signals two clear things: how intolerable working conditions in the platform economy have become, and how heroic their collective act of resistance is. The strike signals the arrival of a conscious and organised platform workforce with a new commitment to take the fight for platform regulation head-on and sustain it in pursuit of rights, safety and dignity. Decisive shift Across the world, the trajectory of platform work is shifting slowly but decisively.

On December 18, the New York City Council passed legislation against unfair ID deactivation with a whopping majority  -  40 votes in favour and just five against, making it veto-proof. Widely recognised as one of the strongest laws on the issue, the legislation establishes clear standards of due process, requiring platforms to demonstrate just cause before cutting workers off from their livelihoods. In effect, it recognises that algorithmic decisions cannot substitute for evidence, transparency, and accountability.

Crucially, this regulatory momentum is not confined to the Global North. Over the past year, the federal government of Mexico passed legislation ensuring that a vast majority of platform workers are treated as employees, entitled to minimum pay standards, paid leave, health and safety protections, bonuses, and even profit-sharing. In Colombia, platform workers are to be classified as employees based on the degree of control exercised by platforms  -  a direct challenge to the fiction of "flexibility and freedom" in tightly managed app-based work.

In Brazil, even as the Supreme Court leaned towards classifying platform workers as independent contractors, it simultaneously affirmed their rights to health, safety, and social security, and awarded damages to a delivery worker fired without substantive evidence. In Chile, the Supreme Court recently upheld a transport authority decision to treat platform-based drivers as employees. Earlier, New York City had already imposed minimum wage/pay requirements and capped the number of platform vehicles on city streets.

In response to a complaint filed against Uber by the International Alliance of App-based Transport Workers, the Dutch National Contact Point has reprimanded the company and urged it to meet higher standards of evidence and governance. Taken together, these developments point to a clear global movement: to discipline platform companies and bring them under stronger regulation  - particularly on the questions of employment, minimum wage/pay, algorithmic decision-making, grievance redressal, health and safety, and unfair ID deactivation. These international trends also make clear that the debate is not merely about classification  -  "gig workers," "independent contractors", or something else  -  but about recognising that they are, first and foremost, workers.

Under the International Labour Organization's Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, all workers are entitled to basic labour protections, irrespective of contractual form. The New Year's eve strike exposes how far India has drifted from this principle and lags behind these global regulatory shifts taking place in the favour of workers. Here, platform workers are still fighting, not only for the most basic safeguards, but also against the hyper-exploitative models such as the dangerous 10-minute deliveries that push risk entirely onto the workers.
