Category: Editorial
Title: Grappling with a counterfeit reality Part Two

Grappling with a counterfeit reality

Youth aged 15 to 24 were identified as most vulnerable to addiction and gaming disorders. A series of teen suicides across the country has been linked to online gaming addiction, task-based viral apps, and mounting digital debt. Dr. Anne Marie Albano, director, Columbia University Clinic For Anxiety and Related Disorders, has explained that social media tends to promote a 'counterfeit reality' for students who are unable to cope with their circumstances.

A study using the Interaction of Person-AffectCognition-Execution (I-PACE) model, appraised that high-frequency social media use among college students undermines academic performance through an emotional pathway whereby social anxiety leads to increased fear of missing out or FOMO. It further said that a strong teacher-student relationship can function as an emotional regulatory mechanism. Research also suggests that healthy relationships with digital tools help in improving focused attention, mental well-being, and academic performance.

When NYU professor Jonathan Haidt's research and landmark book 'The Anxious Generation' drew the world's attention to the mental health crises among the youth, many governments acted. They limited or banned access to social media for adolescents and teens. Australia was the first country to impose a full-fledged ban for users under 16, which was followed by countries like France (under 15) and Malaysia (under 16).

Many others are finalising similar bans. More than 10 countries such as the UK, Denmark, and Norway are mulling over strict age-verification laws. India's Digital Personal Data Protection (D PDP) Act, 2023, mandates 'verifiable parental consent' for data processing for anyone under 18, but does not regulate the 'addictive architecture' of digital platforms.

While the world passes through an intense wave of digitised socialisation, many contend that legally imposed bans and restrictions cannot entirely address the emotional challenges faced by the youth. A group of social scientists maintains that parent-child relationships should be at the centre-stage of managing the use and value of social media, and should help create a safe and supportive physical environment in fostering healthy digital habits. The solution, surely, lies in a comprehensive and multi-stakeholder approach with governments and policymakers building a safety net to regulate tech companies, parents and caregivers, and providing the foundational resilience to youth and adolescents to navigate these platforms safely.

By ARCHANA DUTTA (The writer is former Director-General, Doordarshan & AIR, and former Press Secretary to the President.)
