Category: Editorial
Title: Green steel can shape Indias climate goals Part Two

Green steel can shape India's climate goals trajectory

The sector should no longer be investing in business-as-usual high carbon intensive blast furnace technology. All new capacity needs to be low to near zero carbon, as soon as possible. Policy progress so far Making these bold moves requires responsible executives and boards to have confidence in the trajectory of the sector.

This is where consistent policy signals to guide long-term industrial planning come into play. India has made important strides to set direction for the steel sector. The release of the government's Greening Steel Roadmap in September last year set a practical pathway for the sector's decarbonisation.

This publication of Green Steel Taxonomy in December 2024 made India the first country to formalise such a definition. The National Green Hydrogen Mission, expanding renewable capacity and carbon emission intensity targets for 253 steel units under the Carbon Credit Trading Scheme (CCTS), demonstrates momentum. Yet, a year on from the Taxonomy launch, the policy incentives to really shift investment away from coal-based blast furnaces are yet to materialise and India risks being the only country to continue to add expensive age-old technologies in its economy.

The barriers to green steel are significant but solvable: limited supply and the high cost of green hydrogen; insufficient renewable energy dedicated to industry; limited availability and the informal nature of the scrap market in India; consistent and assured availability of reasonably priced natural gas as the transition fuel; identification and development of natural carbon sinks for sequestration; lack of long-maturity, low-cost debt for green steel projects and the need to de-risk them; and the need for workforce upskilling and technology support. Many of these are challenges of policy and investment, areas where India has demonstrated rapid transformation when it wanted to, as seen in renewable energy over the past decade. To seize this opportunity, we need the government to act as a fair regulator for the sector and set clear, stringent short-, medium-and long-term carbon emission targets for industry to plan its capital investments.

This would include rolling out the carbon price regime at the earliest, which would provide an appropriate mechanism for dispersing this cost of green steel through the value chain. In Europe we have seen that near zero emission technologies could become viable only after the carbon price reached $90-$100 a tonne of CO2. India can learn from this experience when it comes to scheduling its own carbon emission targets.

We need to see the Green Steel Taxonomy socialised well, creation of a domestic market through a public procurement policy for green steel and promotion of greener products with appropriate certification mechanisms and labelling in place. Natural gas will be a transition fuel for the steel industry as it moves towards hydrogen-based production. The government needs to make natural gas availability for the steel sector a priority.

Companies would find it difficult to afford infrastructure for green electricity, green hydrogen or pipelines for natural gas or pipelines for evacuation of captured CO2 on their own. The government needs to set up hubs in key areas for development of green steel where costs of this infrastructure can be shared. With low-carbon manufacturing capacities having a capital intensity which is approximately 30% to 50% higher, these policies are expedient and become urgent in the Indian paradigm.

Steel producers may need some fiscal support too, to make this transition possible. The smaller players will definitely need some additional support to ensure that the transition is equitable. A strategic imperative Green steel can no longer be optional. It is central to India's climate goals, economic future, and global leadership in sustainable industrialisation.
