Category: Editorial
Title: Green steel can shape Indias climate goals Part One

Green steel can shape India's climate goals trajectory

Ia's climate goals trajectory Locking in billions of dollars in carbon inefficient technologies will be environmentally disastrous and harm the Indian economy India stands at a defining moment. Last year, while addressing COP30 delegates in Belém, Brazil, Union Environment Minister Bhupender Yadav committed the country to submit a revised, more ambitious Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). This is an opportunity for the country to position itself as a leader  -  not just with a revised pledge, but with clear plans for the economy-wide decarbonisation needed to meet it, including in those sectors that are hardest to decarbonise.

No industry is more critical here than steel. A chance to lead As one of the largest growing economies, the steel sector is the cornerstone of India's growth, driving infrastructure and industrial development. In fact, to reach the country's latent potential, steel production would need to more than triple from the current approximately 125 million tonnes a year to more than 400 million tonnes by mid-century.

This is unprecedented growth in the given time and will surely come at a cost. The sector accounts for around 12% of the country's carbon emissions today, largely due to its continued reliance on coal. Much like other emerging economies, India faces a twin challenge of ensuring continued development, while meeting long-term climate targets.

Vital to achieving both of these goals will be avoiding locking in high carbon infrastructure. The investments made in the steel sector today will determine the long-term outlook of the steel industry. Absence of ambition on the transition could lock in billions of dollars of carbon inefficient technologies.

This would not only be environmentally disastrous but also render the Indian economy unattractive in the medium to long term. Global markets have spoken. Around the world, we are seeing countries take important strides to transition the steel sector. China, for example, is slated to ramp up its scrap-based secondary steel making production and investment in green hydrogen to reduce reliance on coal in steel making.

Meanwhile, the European Union has been on the de-carbonising journey for around two decades. Its Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) is driving the shift to cleaner steel making for those exporting steel to the region. Countries unable to demonstrate low-carbon production will face steep border charges, risk losing access to premium export markets and being called out as laggards in energy transition that the world really needs to make.

Early movers in green steel will secure a decisive competitive advantage. India's steel sector cannot afford to delay. These warnings have long been noted by India's steel sector, which is already taking steps in the right direction. Tata Steel has piloted injection of hydrogen in blast furnaces, scaled renewable power purchase agreements, and explored carbon capture solutions.

Meanwhile, JSW Steel and JSPL are exploring green hydrogen integration, while the Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) is modernising blast furnaces and exploring low-carbon production routes. This change has been driven from the very top of companies. It requires bold strategic choices and sustained investment in innovation.

And while this progress is important, the sector can and should be doing more. It must move quickly from pilots to demonstration plants, and then to full-scale near zero technologies. Small-and medium-steel manufacturers also have to adapt to the reality of climate emergency by adopting best available technologies and raw materials to produce more carbon efficient steel.
