Category: Editorial
Title: Green auto industry must go beyond EVs Part Two

Green auto industry must go beyond EVs

A recent study by the Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW) found that switching to green electricity and low-carbon steel could cut India's automobile industry emissions by up to 87 per cent. Mitigating Scope 3 emissions is particularly complex, given that many suppliers  -  especially those in the MSME segment  -  operate with limited resources. To get there, decision-makers must act voluntarily and decisively on three fronts.

Electricity procurement: By 2050, the auto industry's annual electricity demand will reach around 54 TWh. Reducing Scope 2 emissions will require sourcing all of this from renewable energy. To put it in context, around 34 GW of renewable energy capacity would be needed just to power auto OEM factories by 2050.

Companies will need to plan early and work with regulators and renewable developers to achieve 100 per cent renewable procurement. Steel: Green steel is the toughest but most crucial link in decarbonising the supply chain. It is expensive today, but demand can drive scale and cost reduction. OEMs should enter into Advance Market Commitments (AMCs) to secure green steel and progressively increase its share to 100 per cent by 2050.

Steel could be produced either using hydrogen-based processes or through greater use of recycled scrap. Other materials, particularly rubber for tyres: Here, electrifying the production process  -  provided the electricity itself is renewable  -  can substantially cut emissions. OEMs must work closely with their suppliers to help them access clean electricity and finance low-carbon technologies.

Components like engines and batteries are already electrified; the next step is ensuring that the electricity used is green. The main concern regarding the 2050 net-zero target is cost. India's auto sector is highly price-sensitive. Our estimates suggest that under such a net zero scenario, price of green steel for automakers could be about 35 per cent more, thereby raising vehicle prices by 2-5 per cent (in inflation-adjusted terms) depending on the segment.

The combined impact of the price rise due to other components will be fairly small. Yet this should be seen in context, as India's per capita income is also projected to quadruple between 2020 and 2050. As purchasing power rises, the modest price increase will have a negligible impact on demand. The long-term benefits  -  cleaner air, resilient supply chains, and export competitiveness  -  will far outweigh short-term costs.

As global markets move towards carbon border taxes and green procurement standards, only those with low-emission supply chains will remain competitive. Beyond clean mobility, if the journey begins on the factory floor, India's auto industry can become the engine driving the country's low-carbon transition. As global markets move towards carbon border taxes, only those with low-emission supply chains will remain competitive By Chetna Arora & Vaibhav Chaturvedi Arora is Programme Associate and Chaturvedi is Senior Fellow at the Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW).

Views are personal
