Category: Editorial
Title: Growing more but exporting less Part Two

Growing more, but exporting less

Further, its use as a biocide or fumigant for food and feed is also prohibited, meaning it is no longer permitted for products like spices. The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India's 2024 order superseded the 2022 order and set a default MRL of 0.1 mg/kg, up from the earlier 0.01 mg/kg for pesticides not registered with the Central Insecticide Board. Since EtO is not registered as a pesticide in India, it is generally interpreted that this default limit applies to EtO residues in food products  -  which creates barriers to entry in foreign markets.

Recently, at the twelfth conference of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, India stymied the global ban on the use of chlorpyrifos  -  a substance responsible for neurodevelopmental harm. This reflects India's policy divergence from global norms. Another reason could be the insufficient availability of testing laboratories in India for export consignments.

The number of Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority-recognised labs  -  responsible for testing a variety of goods and pesticide residues therein  -  varies starkly across states and is heavily clustered in Maharashtra, where 33 labs are functional. Only four testing labs are operational in Uttar Pradesh, and three in West Bengal also covering the Northeast region. States like Odisha and Bihar do not have any certified testing lab.

However, export rejections cannot be attributed solely to a lack of testing labs. The bigger bottlenecks may lie earlier in the value chain. Excessive use of pesticide at the farm level, inadequate farmer training, weak traceability, and fragmented post-harvest handling may be equally to blame. An export shipment rejection results in a loss not only of monetary value but also of trade trust.

The next phase of agricultural growth will be driven by quality, standards, and trust. To actualise the $100-billion ambition, India should not think in silos. Export food quality should be no different from domestic food quality. An integrated domestic policy for the rational use of pesticides in food products will automatically reflect in India's export shipments.

Second, nodal agencies must establish or certify more labs. Third, India must strive to align its regulatory governance with global best practices. By Himanshu Jaiswal The author is a consultant at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress.
