Category: Editorial
Title: Growing more but exporting less Part One

Growing more, but exporting less

Gaps in the standard of goods a hurdle in achieving India's agri-export target, need to align regulatory governance with global best practices India is one of the major agricultural countries - the world's largest producer of pulses, spices, and milk, and the second-largest producer of rice, wheat, fruits, and vegetables. In 2024-25, it achieved record foodgrain production of 357.7 million metric tonnes, a significant increase over the previous year. India's agricultural exports stood at $51.1 billion in 2024-25, up from $34.5 billion in 2019-20.

This motivated India to set an ambitious target for agri-exports worth $100 billion by 2030. Though it seems like a big target, it is achievable with careful planning. A critical factor is the quality and standards of agri-goods. Recently, Japan rejected India's mango consignments due to improper fumigation at our plants.

China rejected India's chilli shipments due to excessive levels of methamidophos, a pesticide linked to nervous system disorders. Nepal also flagged non-compliance with several measures in case of Indian mangoes. This is not a new phenomenon. In 2024, five countries had either banned, recalled, or initiated investigations into Indian spices due to the excessive presence of ethylene oxide (EtO)  -  a carcinogenic substance.

The EU is the biggest market for Indian agricultural exports, accounting for 12- 13%. However, perennial scrutiny of the quality of India's shipments is a major concern. According to the Rapid Alert System For Food database, 2,028 Indian shipments to the EU have been flagged for potential risk from 2020 till date.

India is second, after Türkiye, to receive notifications on this scale. Of the 2,028 consignments, 1,001 were rejected at the border, and for 608 shipments an alert notification was issued. Herbs and spices, and nuts and seeds are the major product groups that have been broadly rejected, together occupying 50% share of the total, followed by cereals and bakery products at 17%.

Of all alert-notified shipments, 573 were found to breach the maximum residue limits (MRL) of EtO, and 136 breached the MRL for aflatoxins, among others. And this is the fact sheet for the EU, let alone other importing countries. One reason behind the high rejection rates is the divergence in prevailing MRLs and policy gaps.

Each country follows its own maximum tolerable limit for any residue, and this may differ across products. In the EU and the UK, the MRL of EtO for spices and herbs is 0.1 mg/kg, while in Japan, it is 0.01 mg/kg. The US and Canada allow a higher MRL of 7 mg/kg, well above the European standard. For sesame seeds and oilseeds, the MRL in the EU and the UK is 0.05 mg/kg, reflecting an effective ban.

This gap in MRLs across India's different export markets is quite significant. Besides, there are structural policy gaps too. A pesticide level that complies with domestic regulations may exceed permissible limits in the EU or Japan where food safety standards are among the most stringent worldwide. EtO has been a prohibited substance in plant protection products in the EU since 1991.
