Category: Editorial
Title: Heres how extreme heat is undermining food Part One

Here's how extreme heat is undermining food security and public health across the world

Undermining food security and public health across the world As temperatures rise across India and South Asia, heatwaves are triggering crop failures, humanitarian disasters, and a growing crisis of heat-related illness In February 2022, shockwaves from the Russian invasion of Ukraine reverberated throughout the world. With Ukraine, one of the world's major wheat exporters, under siege, the spectre of a global food shortage emerged. As wheat prices surged, India prepared to step in to fill the gap in wheat supply.

However, India's plan to help plug the food crisis was derailed by the extraordinary heat that the subcontinent experienced that summer. In March and April 2022, the Indian subcontinent experienced extraordinary heatwaves, with temperatures soaring well above 40°C across north India, desiccating the ripening wheat crop. In May, barely weeks after India pledged to help fill the gap in the global wheat-supply, the government abruptly banned wheat exports to meet domestic demand.

In short, the geopolitical crisis in Europe was compounded by the meteorological crisis in South Asia. Fortunately, in this case, "solidarity lanes" hastily organised by the European Union were able to move Ukrainian grain by road, rail and river, preventing wheat markets from collapsing. However, the consequences of the 2022 heatwave precipitated yet another extraordinary chain of events.

As the 2022 summer heatwaves scorched South Asia, it also accelerated the melting of glaciers high in the Himalayas. The Indus River swelled with glacial meltwater. By August, this meltwater, combined with record-breaking monsoon rainfall, submerged a third of Pakistan and swept away homes, crops, livestock, schools, and clinics.

Over 1,700 people died, 8 million were displaced, and damages exceeded $30 billion in Pakistan, creating one of the world's worst humanitarian disasters. Recent research has since revealed that the atmospheric circulation that drove the extreme rainfall over Pakistan simultaneously triggered record-breaking heat and severe drought over China's Yangtze River Valley, drying up riverbeds, cutting hydropower production, and reducing crop yields. The chain of events in 2022 offers a sobering lesson.

Climate change does not merely cause discrete "extreme weather events" but interacts via profound, non-intuitive pathways with existing pressures as the previous example demonstrates. And these interactions are precipitating a crisis of human health. The direct physiological effects of extreme heat are well documented.

Human beings maintain a narrow core body temperature, around 37°C. Under hot ambient conditions, the body cools itself by sweating. However, under high temperature and humidity conditions, this mechanism can falter. If the body fails to maintain its core temperature, the body experiences a spectrum of heat-related illnesses ranging from heat exhaustion to heat stroke.

A recent climate-change update for India led by one of us found that India's average temperature has risen by nearly 0.9°C since the early 20th century. More pertinently, the hottest day of the year has warmed by as much as 2°C over western India since the 1950s, including parts of Gujarat and Rajasthan. Our assessment projects that the hottest days and hottest nights of the year in India will warm on average by an additional 1.3-1.5 °C in the next 2-3 decades.

While a 1-2oC rise may appear modest, every additional degree is consequential when the body is already operating under extreme baseline heat stress. The projected warming of the hottest nights in India poses additional health risks, as cooler night temperatures traditionally help the body recover from daytime heat. Without respite, people endure continuous thermal stress, compounding dehydration, heat exhaustion, and risk of heat stroke, particularly for those in poorly ventilated homes or without access to fans and water.
