Category: Editorial
Title: Higher disease incidents heat stress How Part One

Higher disease incidents & heat stress: How climate change is impacting cattle in India

& heat stress: How climate change is impacting cattle in India India is the world's largest producer and consumer of milk. As of 2019, milk production in the country stood at 188 million tonnes and was expected to reach about 242 million tonnes by 2023-2024, according to the National Dairy Development Board's Annual Report (2023-2024) Climate change-related impacts, such as higher disease rate, mortality and heat-induced stress, are affecting the cattle of rearers across India, according to a new study. More than 50% buffalo and crossbred cattle rearers, and over 40% of indigenous cattle rearers have reported these adverse impacts of rising temperatures.

The analysis, 'Cattle and Community in a Changing Climate', was released by the Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW)  -  a Delhi-based think tank -  on January 20. The findings are based on a survey of more than 7,300 cattle-rearing households across 15 states, covering 91% of India's bovine population (including cows, buffaloes, bulls, and bullocks). The study was carried out by CEEW researchers  -  Abhishek Jain, Nikita Tank, Aastha Bafna, Ruchira Goyal, Chandan Jha, Stuti Manchanda, Madhumita Srinivasan, Rohan Gupta, Sara Haris, Arti Agarwal, and Apoorve Khandelwal.

The findings are significant, as climate change-related impacts can result in loss of livelihood and a dip in income for cattle rearers. This could, in turn, affect the country's economy. That is because milk contributes approximately 5% to the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and cattle rearing  -  which involves raising and nurturing bovines  -  supports the livelihoods of more than 80 million farmers.

India is the world's largest producer and consumer of milk. As of 2019, milk production in the country stood at 188 million tonnes and was expected to reach about 242 million tonnes by 2023-2024, according to the National Dairy Development Board's Annual Report (2023-2024). The impact The CEEW report found that the most prominent climate change-related impact on cattle was the increase in disease incidents (33% of the surveyed cattle-rearing households reported the impact).

Jain, a co-author of the study, told The Indian Express, "One of the direct impacts of higher temperatures is that they can trigger health issues such as heat stress and heat stroke among these animals." Rise in wet-bulb temperatures (WBT), one of the fallouts of climate change, also contributes to an increase in disease rate. WBT is a more holistic measurement of temperature, which accounts for both air temperature and the moisture it holds. "Higher wet-bulb temperatures create conditions for the proliferation of vectors such as flies and ticks.

This increases the risk of vector-borne diseases such as the lumpy skin disease," said Jain. Warmer temperatures compromise the immune system of animals like cows and buffaloes. This means that their ability to fight diseases decreases. In severe cases, it can lead to death as well. Another fallout of higher temperatures is greater restlessness, especially among buffaloes.

That is because buffaloes have darker skin and absorb more heat compared to, say, cows. An increase in disease rate and restlessness has a direct impact on cattle's milk output. It can shorten lactation periods, reduce the number of productive days, and lead to the early retirement of bovines. Also, Jain said, "With more heat, animals  -  much like humans  -  eat less, which means their milk output would also be less.
