Category: Editorial
Title: Higher disease incidents heat stress How Part Two

Higher disease incidents & heat stress: How climate change is impacting cattle in India

Higher temperatures slow down the digestive system of animals, especially crossbreds, which decreases the yield as well." The report said that between 12% and 14% of the surveyed cattle rearers were already witnessing a dip in the milk output due to the rise in temperatures. Note that crossbreds and buffaloes are more vulnerable to these adverse impacts of climate change compared to indigenous cows. "Unlike indigenous breeds, which have adapted to tropical conditions over millennia, crossbred bovines cannot cope well with rising temperatures.

For instance, the Jersey cow, which has been brought from the United Kingdom for crossbreeding, has a lower number of sweat glands per centimetre on its body than indigenous cows. This makes it difficult for the Jersey cow to dissipate heat," said Jain. As climate change worsens, feed and fodder will also become scarce, which will make animal keeping more expensive.

According to the CEEW study, cattle-rearing households are already concerned about the rising prices  -  more than 70% of rearers face challenges accessing affordable feed and fodder. Need for adaptation The researchers have highlighted that, as a majority of cattle rearers in India wish to continue rearing in the future, there is a need to make the sector climate resilient. In the survey, they found that 75% of the cattle rearers want their next generation to continue keeping animals.

Also, 40% of the rearers wish to further expand their herd size. According to the 77th round of the National Sample Survey Organisation (2019), the average bovine herd size in rural India is 3.14 animals, indicating the predominance of smallholder livestock ownership. To curb the adverse effects of climate change on cattle, the researchers have recommended a series of steps.

For instance, they have said that selective breeding within indigenous breeds is crucial. "A share of farmers are preferring crossbreds and buffaloes because they have higher milk productivity than indigenous breeds. However, crossbred animals are not as climate resilient as indigenous ones. That's why selective breeding of indigenous cattle can help increase not only productivity but also resilience against climate change impacts," said Jain.

There is also a requirement to improve infrastructure related to animal sheds, which can be crucial in protecting cattle from rising temperatures. The survey found that one in four cattle rearers were struggling to acquire resources to build animal sheds. Jain said, "The government can support farmers by providing them subsidies and cheaper loans for building animal sheds and constructing them in a way that enables better microclimatic conditions for the animals.

These sheds can be better ventilated and well shaded." The researchers also pointed out that it would be important to ensure adequate nutrients in the feed and fodder for the animals so that they can build immunity and disease resistance. The study said, "To future-proof the sector against climate risks, tailored and comprehensive awareness initiatives are needed to help rearers understand the risks and rewards of different animal types. Equipping them with this knowledge can enable more informed, sustainable herd-expansion decisions, ensuring resilience in the face of evolving environmental and economic challenges." Written by: Alind Chauhan
