Category: Editorial
Title: Hong Kongs identity quandary Part Two

Hong Kong's identity quandary

More broadly, Hong Kong's long-cherished rule of law is being steadily eroded. Since 2019, the number of foreign judges on Hong Kong's Court of Final Appeal - the city's highest judicial authority - has fallen from 15 to six, some having resigned in protest. (Foreign judges were installed after the British handover in 1997 to provide expertise and continuity to a long-established common-law system.) The most prominent resignation was that of Jonathan Sumption, a former British Supreme Court Justice, who warned that Hong Kong's rule of law was being jeopardised by the oppressive political environment created by China and continual calls for "judicial patriotism".

Equally telling are the tight linkages between the growth fluctuations in the Chinese and Hong Kong economies, leaving the latter in a vise. From 2012 to 2024, China's GDP growth averaged 6.1%, a four-percentage-point deceleration from the 10.1% trend over the previous 32 years (1980 to 2011). In that period, Hong Kong GDP growth averaged just 1.5%, a 3.6-percentage-point deceleration from the 5.1% trend over the prior 32 years.

According to the International Monetary Fund's latest forecast, Chinese GDP growth is expected to slow further, to 3.4% by 2030. With the two economies effectively joined at the hip, that puts the risk to Hong Kong economic growth on the downside, very much at odds with the IMF's forecast of a mild reacceleration in the city's GDP growth to 2.3% in 2030. I was in Hong Kong last week to speak at a major conference on US-China relations.

There was a bull's-eye on my back when I addressed a roundtable entitled "Beyond the Middleman: Hong Kong's Influence in Superpower Rivalry." The question under discussion was whether Hong Kong's unique features allow it to play an independent role in tempering geopolitical rifts, such as the one between China and the US. Drawing on the arguments above, I politely argued that, since 2019, Hong Kong's capacity to serve as an honest broker in the Sino-American conflict has been compromised by China's heavy hand. No one in the room agreed with me.

According to them, I was ignoring Hong Kong's greatest strength: its singular legacy of resilience and reinvention. Locals chafe at the suggestion that Hong Kong has become just another big Chinese city. I was reminded of that when I left the airport and looked up at that familiar sign. Steeped in denial, "Asia's World City" is clinging to its old identity and reputation.

By Stephen S Roach, Faculty Member, Yale University, and former Chairman, Morgan Stanley Asia
