Category: Editorial
Title: Hormuz crisis impact Indias crude imports Part Two

Hormuz crisis impact: India's crude imports surge 60% in April- June; net oil, gas imports up 45%

India's petroleum product export volumes declined by a fourth to 11.3 million tonnes in April-June from 15 million tonnes in the corresponding period of last year as domestic fuel supplies took precedence amid the global supply crunch. Nonetheless, the exports surged nearly 40% in value due to the jump in international petroleum fuel prices. Taking into account the overall oil, LNG, and petroleum product imports as well as fuel exports, the country's net oil and gas imports rose 45.3% y-o-y in April-June to $44.9 billion, the PPAC data shows.

The concerns for India Energy imports are a major component of India's overall imports, and any meaningful increase has ramifications for the country's trade balance, current account, inflation, and the rupee's exchange rate, among others. For instance, India's wholesale fuel and power inflation was 25% in April, 30.3% in May, and 27.4% in June, as per government data. As India imports 1.8-2 billion barrels of crude oil a year, every $1-per-barrel increase in oil prices bumps up the country's oil import bill by up to $2 billion on an annualised basis.

According to a March report by Nomura, India is among the three most vulnerable Asian economies to high oil prices in terms of import bill and current account balances, the other two being Thailand and South Korea. It said that every 10% oil price increase typically widens India's current account deficit by 0.4% of the GDP. As per PPAC data, crude oil imports in 2025-26 stood at over $122 billion.

If oil prices sustain at $100 per barrel in the current financial year and import volumes don't decline notably, the oil import bill could be upwards of $200 billion for the year. Heavy dependence on energy imports has led to a double whammy of supply tightness and price surge. While highly diversified crude sourcing has helped in ensuring adequate oil, petrol, diesel, and jet fuel availability amid the West Asia crisis, some rationing of gas supplies to certain industries and commercial consumers was done in order to ensure adequate availability for households and a few priority sectors.

Written by: Sukalp Sharma
