Category: Editorial
Title: How do astronauts return from space and Part Two

How do astronauts return from space and survive re-entry? | Explained

Another issue during re-entry is the communication blackout. The extreme heat generated during re-entry strips electrons from air molecules, turning it into a layer of ionised plasma. This plasma sheath acts like a metallic bubble around the capsule that reflects and blocks radio waves. Because signals cannot pass through this electrified layer, it causes a communication blackout, leaving the crew and ground control unable to speak to each other until the capsule slows down enough for the plasma to vanish.

To manage the dreaded communication blackout during re-entry, engineers utilise a combination of orbital relay networks and high-frequency signal physics. By transmitting data upward to relay satellites (such as NASA's TDRSS) rather than downward to ground stations, the signal passes through the thinner, less dense regions of the plasma sheath in the rear of the capsule. Why are parachutes deployed for landing?

When a capsule re-enters the atmosphere, it is decelerated by aerobraking, which is the process of using atmospheric drag to slow down a capsule. As the air density increases at lower altitudes, the capsule's speed drops until it approaches its terminal velocity  -  the point where the upward force of air resistance balances the downward pull of gravity. Any further reduction in velocity has to be achieved by deploying additional aerodynamic surfaces like parachutes.

For a capsule returning from space, the terminal velocity in the lower atmosphere is still hundreds of kilometres per hour, far too fast for a safe landing. Practically, even before reaching the terminal velocity, the parachute has to be deployed to reduce the velocity further to make a soft landing in the sea. How will the Gaganyaan crew module re-enter?

ISRO pioneered its re-entry capabilities with the 2007 Space Capsule Recovery Experiment (SRE), proving it could safely return an orbiting craft to earth. This was further advanced by the 2014 Crew Module Atmospheric Re-entry Experiment (CARE), which validated the full-scale thermal protection and parachute systems essential for surviving the extreme heat of a sub-orbital re-entry. The Gaganyaan orbital module has two parts: the crew module (CM) and the service module (SM).

The orbital module will be de-orbited by the thrusters in the SM and after that, the SM will separate and be destroyed by the intense heat of re-entry. Upon atmospheric re-entry, the CM maintains its trajectory within the re-entry corridor, strictly avoiding undershoot and overshoot boundaries. Operating as a semi-ballistic body, the CM executes controlled manoeuvres to reach its targeted landing site by modulating its lift vector through bi-propellant thruster firings.

Once the module reaches lower altitudes, a three-stage redundant parachute system is deployed to ensure a safe and smooth splashdown in the Bay of Bengal, which is the primary landing zone for the mission. Unnikrishnan Nair S. is Former Director, VSSC and IIST; Founding Director, HSFC; and an expert in launch vehicle systems, orbital re-entry and human spaceflight technologies.

He is currently the Dr Sarabhai Professor at VSSC.
