Category: Editorial
Title: How land pooling solves acquisition woes Part One

How land pooling solves acquisition woes

Compared with land acquisitions, town planning schemes reduce displacement, ensure equitable benefit-sharing, and enable faster urban development Rajasthan has recently announced the State's first land pooling scheme. The government is optimistic that the scheme will help with land acquisition and deliver the land needed for roads, infrastructure, and development activities. Other States, too, are either actively thinking of implementing land pooling schemes.

While States such as Gujarat and Maharashtra have found success, much will depend on localised innovation and institutional flexibility. Urban infrastructure projects in India have historically relied on land acquisitions. This process has become increasingly complex and financially burdensome, particularly after the enactment of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.

The limitations of land acquisition are both structural and procedural. Even before the 2013 Act, acquisition processes were time-consuming and often contested. Post-2013, the inclusion of rehabilitation and resettlement provisions have further increased financial obligations, making large-scale acquisitions for urban infrastructure increasingly unviable.

This has resulted in a growing gap between planned infrastructure and its implementation. Plans are often under-executed due to the inability to mobilise land. On pooling land While States have tried different solutions, land pooling mechanisms, especially Town Planning (TP) schemes, have emerged as a viable alternative.

In a land pooling model, landowners voluntarily contribute land for infrastructure development and receive a portion of the serviced land in return. This method reduces the need for compulsory acquisition and distributes development benefits among stakeholders. The TP scheme, widely implemented in Gujarat and Maharashtra, is among the most successful land-pooling models in India.

Under this model, landowners voluntarily contribute about 25-40% of their land to provide infrastructure such as roads, parks, public amenities and housing for economically weaker sections. The remaining land (60-75%) is returned to them as reconstituted plots that are better shaped, serviced, and more valuable. This method integrates land assembly, infrastructure provision, and cost recovery.

A key strength of the TP scheme is its participatory, people-centric approach. It is also financially self-sustaining, as incremental charges from landowners are recovered during development rather than up front. Compared with land acquisitions, TP schemes reduce displacement, ensure equitable benefit-sharing, and enable faster urban development while preserving environmentally sensitive areas.

Recognising its potential, the Government of India has promoted TP schemes since 2019. Land pooling is, however, not a new idea. For instance, in Gujarat, it was introduced almost 100 years back and formalised under the Gujarat Town Planning and Urban Development Act, 1976. And over time, in Gujarat, more than 1,000 sq.

km across Ahmedabad, Surat, Rajkot, Vadodara, and Gandhinagar have been planned through TP schemes. But unlike Gujarat, Maharashtra failed to update its statutory provisions for enabling TP schemes over time. However, Pune and the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority have recently adopted this model again to provide infrastructure and serviced land in the city's peripheral areas.

Exemplary model While other States have tried to implement the model, it has not been easy. For example, in Guwahati, even though the Guwahati Metropolitan Development Authority Act, 1985 included provisions for the preparation and implementation of development schemes, it lacked clarity on critical aspects, including the percentages for land appropriation and institutional roles. An equally significant challenge was the absence of digitised land records; land records in Guwahati were maintained manually.
