Category: Editorial
Title: How two wars have upended the global order Part Two

How two wars have upended the global order

India has moved in that direction. There are almost 41 countries from which India is importing. In fact, India's attempt to import from Russia also came under special attack earlier with US levying 25 per cent tax on imports from countries that had traded with Russia. Second, if import is unavoidable can we hold an inventory lasting for several months?

Data indicate that this has also been done, although not at the scale as suggested by International Energy Agency (IEA), which suggest Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) covering 90 days of domestic consumption. But this has a high cost. Expensive storage facilities will also have to be put up. One has to strike a balance here.

We can look at how Japan has done, which has reserves that can cover domestic consumption for more than 200 days. Another way to do is to look at the option of having forward commercial storage agreements with source companies that will reduce the cost. Third, India and other countries must look at alternative sources of energy.

Use of coal was discouraged because of environmental considerations. Solar energy is a good option. Much has been done in recent years with its share in total installed power generation capacity increasing to about 25 per cent. But more should be done. On a mission mode expansion in the area must be undertaken.

The other alternative is nuclear energy. India has made progress in this area also. France is one major country where, based on some estimates, nuclear energy meets nearly 70 per cent of energy requirements with 57 nuclear reactors in place. However, safety concerns related to nuclear energy cannot be brushed aside.

Experts need to come together and provide a plan of action. These, however, are all medium-term objectives. While a number of initiatives can be undertaken to take care of the present situation, one must take note that the world is moving towards a sub-optimal situation. We will have to live in a costlier system.

In the emerging world of dominance of 'might', will defence need more attention? Will 'guns' take a lead over 'butter' in the allocation of resources? Emerging economies like India need to create buffers for essential commodities to mitigate the exogenous shocks. Some of the essential inputs that we may have to focus could be food, fuel (including gas), fertilizer, and on the resources side, it is foreign exchange reserves and fiscal space.

India has sufficient food and forex reserves. Forex reserves do not help always us in the present case when, supply is disrupted. With prudent fiscal management, India has created a fiscal space to mitigate the risks. Fiscal prudence must continue to remain a major focus of the government. With the changing world situation, the medium-term strategy must be to create buffers for fuel and fertilizers or any other commodity, which is critically important.

We should also work towards an improved world environment of cooperation rather than confrontation. By C Rangarajan & NR Bhanumurthy Rangarajan is Chairman and Bhanumurthy is Director of Madras School of Economics, Chennai
