Category: Editorial
Title: How RBIs communication has evolved Part Two

How RBI's communication has evolved

With reforms in money markets, the scope of credit policy was widened to "monetary and credit policy". From 2005-06 onwards, the word credit was dropped and "monetary policy" was announced every quarter. In 1996, the RBI launched its website that played a major role in ushering in changes. In 2007, the website was made available in a multilingual format.

The central bank published cartoon booklets to impart financial education. It also put up a data portal allowing download of macroeconomic and financial data. In 2008, the RBI framed a formal communications policy which was updated in 2025. The goals of the policy are "transparent communication, clear interpretation and accurate articulation of the multifarious objectives of the Reserve Bank".

In 2008, the PRD was upgraded to Department of Communications. Today, this department shepherds all communications. Post-2008 financial crisis, the RBI started teleconferencing with media and researchers. It also started live webcasting its monetary policy and started publishing the Financial Stability Report.

In 2016, it implemented the ITF, and the new additions to communications were the publishing of monetary policy resolution statements and monetary policy report, releasing minutes of monetary policy meetings, and writing a letter to the government in case inflation targets were missed for three quarters. The RBI also established its accounts on social media platforms such as X, LinkedIn, and Instagram. It has now taken a leap and added a web series and a podcast to its communication repertoire.

While central banks have podcasts, producing a web series to show the RBI's evolution and functions is a unique effort. In 1982, then governor Manmohan Singh said that given the importance of central bank policies, they should be subject to public debate. However, as central bankers are "very shy" and "not adept in techniques of mass communication", their policies "are always not well-understood and appreciated".

How these words have turned on their heads. Now, thanks to so many communication channels, every word is parsed, which leads to misunderstanding of a different kind. By Amol Agrawal, Associate Professor, National Institute of Securities Markets
