Category: Editorial
Title: How to fix Delhis air pollution disaster Part One

How to fix Delhi's air pollution disaster

Openness to diverse sources of expertise and rigorous testing of ideas before scaling up might be the key to fix Delhi's hazardous air. Why has Delhi's air pollution problem persisted? Is there a way to fix it? For at least a decade, Delhi's air has been hazardous for several months each winter.

The problem is visible, palpable, and pervasive. It has led to multiple government reports, many research papers, and global news stories. But this winter, the conditions faced by Delhi's residents were no better than in previous years. And this is in a place which includes all the institutions of the world's largest democracy.

Why has progress been so difficult? Some years ago, Amartya Sen suggested that democracies are better at some forms of accountability than others - they will not tolerate famines, but will allow widespread, chronic malnutrition. Delhi's problem is acute for a period, but then it goes away. So, while it is more visible than something like malnutrition, that visibility is temporary.

Flooded roads in the monsoon season suffer from the same lack of persistence as a continuous problem. In the case of air pollution, like malnutrition, the health impacts are hidden and cumulative, which reduces the salience of the problem for politicians trying to manage accountability to voters to their own benefit. Another factor that works against a solution is that there are multiple sources for the problem - vehicular and industrial emissions, burning of agricultural waste, and all kinds of combustion for heat, fuel, and entertainment.

This makes it difficult to quantify the contributions of individual sources to overall pollution, especially when the impacts may not be additive and separable, as in a proverbial witch's brew. Meteorological conditions, which can vary greatly, add to the problem of targeting solutions. All those reports and research papers have seemingly not yet given clear answers.

Problems with the 'learn from China' perspective Of course, one answer to this problem is to tackle all the sources at once. China did something like this in its winning battle against air pollution in its capital, Beijing, and the surrounding region. "Learn from China" is a theme that has been cropping up in media assessments of Delhi's pollution problem.

But China's government is very different than India's - its ruling structure makes coordination across levels of government easier, and command and control policies much more feasible. More broadly, China's government has shown strategic intent in ways that India's government has mostly lacked - how electric vehicles (EVs) have grown in China is something India has barely begun to emulate. It must also be recognised that China began its successful push to reduce air pollution just over a decade ago, when it was already significantly richer and more developed than India is even now.

But that cannot be a reason for not solving the problem. In fact, technological progress in the last decade, and a major example of successful problem-solving should make it easier for India. Air pollution is a regional problem, not confined to a particular political boundary. China recognised this and worked accordingly.
