Category: Editorial
Title: How RBIs communication has evolved Part One

How RBI's communication has evolved

From keeping pace with changes in central bank communications worldwide, it has now taken a leap and added digital channels to its repertoire The Reserve Bank of India's (RBI) communications have entered a new era. It first launched a webseries (RBI Unlocked) in 2025, followed by a podcast (RBI Talks: From Paisa to Policy) in 2026. For a student of financial history, it is quite incredible to take note of the innovations made by the RBI and other central banks to enhance their communications.

For most parts of their history, central banks were seen as quaint organisations led by mysterious individuals. Montagu Norman, governor of Bank of England (1920-44), famously said: "Never explain, never excuse." His words were echoed later by Federal Reserve chairperson Alan Greenspan (1987-2006), who quipped, "If I seem unduly clear to you, you must have misunderstood what I said." Having said that, the design of a central bank is such that it has to communicate its policies. The question is whether it does so silently or openly.

In their earlier avatar, central banks communicated silently by releasing multiple reports - annual reports, bulletins, macroeconomic and financial data, economic research, and so on. They also played a silent role as their job was limited to maintaining the fixed exchange rate. In 1971, the fixed exchange rate system collapsed followed by a significant rise in inflation.

These dual pressures shifted the central banking consensus towards targeting inflation and letting exchange rates be market-driven. The new consensus gave birth to the inflation targeting framework (ITF), where transparency in communications became a major central bank tool. Central banks started issuing detailed monetary policy statements, organising press conferences and providing forward guidance.

The central bankers became a public face and their speeches guided markets. The next push came during the 2008 crisis when central banks were criticised for supporting the Wall Street and ignoring the Main Street. The central banks responded by taking steps to communicate with the people. Technology played a huge role as a catalyst in communications.

From closed-door press conferences, central banks started using YouTube to live-stream monetary policy decisions. To explain monetary policy, the central banks of New Zealand and England used cartoons and the Central Bank of Jamaica used reggae music. The European Central Bank started a blog and a podcast.

Central bank websites became user-friendly and they established social media handles. How does the RBI fare in this communications history? The fourth and fifth volumes of RBI's history trace the history of its communications. Like other central banks, communications were always an important function of RBI but there was no formal communication policy.

From its inception, the RBI released several reports highlighting economic developments and policies: annual report, monthly bulletin, currency and finance report and Weekly Statistical Supplement. In 1969, it appointed a press relations officer, which was upgraded to press relations division (PRD) in 1978. The PRD published material about the RBI and monitored its press reports.

After the 1991 crisis, the central bank undertook many financial sector reforms that touched communications too. The lobal central banking turn towards transparency also played a role. Before 1991, the RBI announced credit policy twice - in April (slack season) and October (busy season) - behind closed doors with bankers.
