Category: Editorial
Title: How two wars have upended the global order Part One

How two wars have upended the global order

The collapse of the rules based global trading framework will lead to a high-cost economic system. Creating ample buffers stocks of fuel and fertilizer is the way out The world is entering an era of 'Might is Right'. It has always been so but with the two recent wars - Russia-Ukraine and US, Israel-Iran - this has become pronounced.

Even if there is some justification, relentless attacking of another country through air strikes is a violation of the principle with which the international order was built up after World War II. In this new situation, in a world interconnected through trade, not only the nations directly involved but also other nations suffer. The world trade is shrinking.

Interdependence has become a liability. Earlier, unilateral imposition of high tariffs by US resulted in the weaponisation of tariffs. Tariffs were used to achieve non-economic objectives. Developing economies were allowed to levy tariffs on certain commodities because of the time needed to catch up with developed countries.

If this is to be reconsidered, there is a forum and method to do it. Unilateral actions on tariffs can only disrupt world trade. How should developing countries react to the emerging situation of wars and tariffs? What can be done to reduce their adverse impact? Reversal of trade theory The economic impact of the two wars has been severe.

They have knocked out the very basis of international trade, the world order and its governance. International trade theory suggests that if there is free trade among countries, each country will produce that commodity in which it has a comparative advantage. The net result will be that the world will be a least-cost economy with welfare gains.

Of course there are certain caveats. When WTO was being set up, experts recognised that there is a need to provide certain concessions to developing countries as mentioned earlier. Benefits of international trade are also built on the premise that there are no impediments in the transport of goods. Unfortunately, we see a breakdown of all these assumptions in the current situation.

There is a blockade of Strait of Hormuz by both US and Iran. India depends on Gulf countries for crude oil to a large extent. Nearly half of India's oil imports are from Gulf countries. India's dependence on Gulf countries for gas is even greater. If there is no free passage through the Strait, we face an extremely difficult situation.

Overall availability of crude oil gets reduced and prices shoot up. Both US and Iran are ignoring the code of conduct laid down by maritime laws. Strait of Hormuz is not Suez Canal which was artificially constructed and where toll fee is permissible. Strait of Hormuz is a natural sea way. A modest toll fee may be permissible to take care of the maintenance of the sea way but not a heavy toll.

Supply disruptions and alternatives Supply disruptions affect the production processes. The supply chain linking many countries is an integral part of the production system now world over. With the Strait of Hormuz being restricted and breaking the supply chain, it has caused heavy risks on both growth and inflation across the countries.

What could have been done by India or any other country caught in this mess? First, particularly in the case of critical inputs, we should avoid dependence on other countries. This is not always possible. In the case of crude oil, it is nature's gift. One thing we can do is not to rely on one group of countries particularly geographically aligned, but diversify the sourcing.
