Category: Editorial
Title: How to fix Delhis air pollution disaster Part Two

How to fix Delhi's air pollution disaster

A peculiar feature of Indian federalism has been its inability to develop regional structures. Long-established river basin authorities and water tribunals have not done too well in India. There has been little effort and imagination employed for air pollution, but that may be about to change. The World Bank has recently announced $300 million each for Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, money that will go to a range of initiatives to reduce local (and ultimately) regional air pollution, including incentives for EVs, reduced agricultural waste burning, and so on.

Hopefully, these efforts can be compared and coordinated, even though the money will go to individual state governments. For some reason, Punjab is missing from this plan. This would have been an opportunity to make investments in a state which is in a dire situation on several fronts, and which contributes to Delhi's air pollution woes.

Nevertheless, the World Bank project, if implemented well, may mark a turning point in dealing with the issue of Delhi's toxic air. It will bring in expertise as well as money. By contrast, recent efforts such as cloud seeding have seemed to be implemented in desperation and without adequate expertise being employed.

The Delhi Pollution Control Committe's (DPCC) announcement of prizes for practical and sustainable solutions to the capital territory's pollution problem also seems like grasping at straws, though it has the potential of engaging bright minds across a spectrum of institutions, especially universities. It may turn out to be something that evolves into a new model for problem-solving in India's public policy arena, where politicians and bureaucrats sometimes struggle with cross-cutting policy challenges. Openness to diverse sources of expertise and rigorous testing of ideas before scaling up may be validated by the DPCC contest if done well.

These principles have already been successful in Gujarat, where four economists (all based outside India, but two of Indian origin) worked with the Gujarat Pollution Control Board to design and experimentally evaluate a market mechanism to control industrial air pollution, which worked much better than "command and control" regulations alone. This 2025 study found that the reduction in mortality from reduced pollution was 25 times the cost of running the market, or a 2,400% rate of return. Put this together with the World Bank effort and the DPCC contest, and perhaps the air will clear in Delhi and beyond its borders.

By Nirvikar Singh The writer is a professor of Economics, University of California, Santa Cruz
