Category: Editorial
Title: In Noida and beyond workers protests are Part Two

In Noida and beyond, workers' protests are proof that cost of living crisis can no longer be ignored

All of these are less than the inflation-adjusted minimum wages applicable for unskilled workers. Perhaps the biggest evidence of distress in the economy is the demand for work under VB-G RAM G, which has remained high despite the fact that the wages it offers are almost two-thirds of the market wages in many states. Almost one-third of households in rural areas have worked under this scheme despite the low wages.

The cost-of-living crisis is partly a crisis of inflation making it difficult for an average worker to spend on essentials. It is largely a crisis of stagnant earnings across a spectrum of workers. This has affected regular workers in the organised sector as well as millions of informal workers in the unorganised sector.

The same goes for those self-employed in tiny enterprises in the unorganised sector. None of this is surprising. This situation has persisted for almost a decade. Even the hope of a revival after the pandemic is belied by the data available after 2022. This was also acknowledged by the Economic Survey, which highlighted the declining incomes of regular and self-employed workers.

Unfortunately, the situation is likely to become worse given the trend of rising inflation in recent months. While some of this is a result of the geopolitical uncertainty and the consequent rise in energy prices, it is likely to spill over to other areas affected by the global uncertainty. The India Meteorological Department predicts a deficient monsoon this year, and if this is accompanied by declining agricultural production, there is likely to be even more pressure on food prices.

The distress in the economy has wider implications. The low earnings among the majority of workers are also responsible for the low demand in the economy, which has impacted private investment. While the government may be in a position to regulate and control prices in the short run, a long-term solution for the crisis requires interventions to raise workers' incomes, which have stagnated for a long time.

It may also require the government to intervene and regulate working conditions. It is necessary to raise incomes not just to protect millions of workers from falling into poverty but also for the economy's revival through demand generation. It is for the government to decide the way to do it. But it is clear that the cost-of-living crisis can no longer be ignored.

Written by: Himanshu The writer is associate professor, Centre for Economic Studies and Planning, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
