Category: Editorial
Title: India rejected Indus Waters Treaty ruling Part Two

India rejected Indus Waters Treaty ruling. Why it still helps Pakistan

Road ahead for Pakistan The best case scenario for Pakistan would be to get the UN Security Council to pass a resolution against India, framing its dispute over the Treaty as a security issue. It has been working towards that aim, and is almost sure to take a shot at it during the remaining four months of its tenure as a non-permanent member of the Security Council. Another alternative would be to get the Security Council or the UN General Assembly to refer the matter to the International Court of Justice.

These are extremely far-fetched scenarios, however, and unlikely to play out as per Pakistan's desires. India has much greater clout at the UN, and can get such moves scuttled. Besides these efforts, the only other option for Pakistan is to try and create a narrative, painting India as someone that does not respect international law or abide by treaty provisions.

This is something that Pakistan is already indulging in, and the efforts are almost certain to intensify. India has decided to absorb the repercussions of the decision. Besides creating a diplomatic counter-narrative, India is preparing to fight the legal battle, if it becomes necessary. It is not that India does not have a legal case, and it is confident that it can defend its decision to put the Treaty in abeyance.

Road ahead for India But India's main focus is on expeditious completion of the projects that will allow it to make full use of its rights on the three western rivers  -  Indus, Jhelum and Chenab  -  that have been allocated to Pakistan under the Treaty. The treaty provisions allow India to make limited use of these waters, but this has not been possible because of Pakistan's repeated objections to anything that India tries to build on these rivers. India is pursuing eight infrastructure projects on these rivers in Jammu and Kashmir, worth Rs 50,000 crore.

At least one of them, seeking to divert waters from the Chenab river to the Beas, goes beyond the provisions of the Treaty, which does not allow inter-basin transfer of waters. India has made its decision. For it, the Indus Waters Treaty is as good as dead. 'Abeyance' is deliberately being used to keep it vague, since there is no provision to terminate or suspend the Treaty unilaterally.

But as far as India is concerned, the Treaty does not exist. That is the reason why India disengaged itself from the neutral expert process last year, which was set up on its own request. India continues to share hydrological data with Pakistan, but only through its high commission in Islamabad, and not through the Permanent Indus Commission set up under the Treaty.

Continuing to participate in the neutral expert process or sharing information through the Permanent Indus Commission could be seen as utilising the provisions of the Indus Waters Treaty, which could be contrary to its position that it does not even exist. It is also clear that the chances of the Treaty being revived in its original form are next to none. India has said the Treaty would remain in 'abeyance' till Pakistan continues to support cross-border terrorism.

India has also suggested that the two countries renegotiate the Treaty, something that is likely to be unacceptable to Pakistan. Pakistan realises that it is unlikely to get a deal as good as the current one. Also, India is almost sure to insist on a strictly bilateral agreement, without the need for any third party like the World Bank, something Pakistan is unlikely to agree to.
