Category: Editorial
Title: Indias FTAs will work better than before Part One

India's FTAs will work better than before

FTAs between countries and blocs will be the new normal, galvanised by the US action on tariffs; besides, post-Covid deals have been more effective for India FY26 had started on a gloomy note with the US announcing its tariff policy, which was exacerbated by the imposition of additional tariffs in August. At 50%, the tariff picture looked challenging. Estimates varied on its effect on exporters and the final impact on GDP growth.

Being a domestic-oriented economy, the impact on India's GDP growth was not expected to go beyond 0.2-0.4%. In fact, by December-end, overall exports to the US saw a 9.7% growth compared with 5.7% for the same period in 2024-25 - and much higher than the 2.4% witnessed at the aggregate level. How did this happen?

First, important products like pharma and mobile phone were exempted. Second, there was frontloading of exports in the earlier months. Third, some exports were re-routed through other countries. Fourth, negotiations with import partners on pricing helped maintain some of the contracts. The free trade agreement (FTA) with the European Union (EU) and the US deal will now place export prospects on a higher trajectory, as they are our largest export destinations.

Two points must be kept in mind. The first is that exporters in industries such as textiles, chemicals, leather products, marine products, and gems and jewellery would be at an advantage as these markets offer more opportunities. India will have an edge over rivals like Bangladesh and Vietnam that have a slightly higher tariff.

Secondly, imports too will increase and pose competition to the domestic industry. The details thus become important because FTAs in general offer reciprocal benefits for both sides. The US deal generates additional interest, considering President Trump has spoken about India buying oil not from Russia but from the US and Venezuela.

Indian refiners need clarity because apart from Russian oil costing lower, freight costs would be higher for other alternatives. Further, since imports cannot be reduced to nil in a month but only gradually, the phasing of reduction would be pertinent. The EU deal also demands close scrutiny as non-tariff barriers can remain a concern although tariffs have been lowered for over 95% of exported goods.

For instance, the West is known to enforce rules such as phytosanitary conditions to block farm product imports from emerging markets. Similarly, environmental issues come in with certification requirements. Subjects such as carbon emissions therefore become important. The list gets longer when labour conditions are scrutinised.

Thus, signing trade deals is a necessity and help in the long run, but the details matter to all exporters. The question, then, is whether FTAs really work or not? History provides interesting clues. In the past, any kind of agreements - FTA, Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, or Comprehensive Economic Co-operation Agreement - has not moved the needle significantly.

For example, Singapore's share in Indian exports came down from 5.3% in 2006 to 3% in 2024-25; in case of Japan, the share dropped from 2.1% in 2012 to 1.4%; and that of South Korea fell from 2.2% in 2009 to 1.3%. There were success stories with Malaysia, as the share went up from 1.3% in 2012 to 1.7%, and Mauritius (from 0.2% in 2023 to 0.5%). The post-Covid share of UAE was up from 7% to 8.4% and that of Australia from 1.5% to 2%.
