Category: Editorial
Title: India must draw a red line on US unilateral Part Two

India must draw a red line on U.S. unilateral sanctions

The result of all these on-again, off-again sanctions, waivers, extensions and exemptions is to defeat India's best efforts to diversify and broad-base its energy, food and fertilizer sourcing. India's decision not to protest the U.S.'s decision to go to war with Iran in the first place is presumably out of concern that the U.S. may come down even more heavily on the Indian economy.

"The sui generis 'whack-a-mole' nature of these measures only adds to their capriciousness," former Reserve Bank of India Governor Urjit Patel concludes in his book The Great Sanctions Hack. According to his research, the U.S. stands out as the world's main sanctioning power, having imposed 365 sanctions in the present century, with the European Union a distant second at about 133.

Only 12 counter-sanctions by China, Russia and Iran are active. According to the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the U.S. today maintains sanctions on at least 23 countries and has more than a dozen sanction regimes on specific issues (cyber-terror, non-proliferation, and foreign interference).

The United Nations Security Council, in comparison, has only about 15 active sanction regimes in all. Compliance increases coercion It is therefore necessary to analyse India's experience with U.S. sanctions over the past decade and draw conclusions about the pros and cons of yielding to them. There is little evidence that yielding to unilateral U.S.

sanctions curbs its appetite, as India's experience since 2019 shows; instead it leads to additional demands for compliance. Conversely, when India ignored sanctions such as Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA) and purchased Russian S-400 air defence systems in 2018, it faced no U.S. penalties and benefited from the decision, as during Operation Sindoor (May 2025).

The "opportunity costs" of complying must also be calculated  -  had India continued to buy discounted sweeter Iranian crude or Venezuelan oil from 2019-25, as it did with Russian oil (2022-25), the government could have saved billions, and built strategic energy reserves (as China has) that would have been useful today. Had India not complied with sanctions against the Chabahar port, it built rail and road infrastructure in Iran, and not curtailed its plans for the International North South Transport Corridor (INSTC) through Iran's Bandar Abbas, it may have had connectivity in place that could have reduced its dependence on imports coming through the Strait of Hormuz today. Moreover, India's compliance with U.S.

international sanctions has further weakened the rules-based international order and the UN's multilateral mandate. Going forward, if the Indian government decides to turn course and announce a national resolve against unilateral sanctions, it will not only spur its own private sector to seek braver options but also inspire countries in the neighbourhood and the Global South to follow suit, pushing back on other coercive measures employed by big powers such as China as well. The government has a number of avenues to pursue if it decides to do so  -  from building payment mechanisms such as the rupee-rial trade system with Iran, to developing national payment systems including intra-BRICS settlement arrangements, to using "air-gapped" banking and financial institutions insulated from western pressure, as well as exponentially expanding renewable and alternative energy sources.

Unfortunately, by withdrawing its bid to host the United Nations Climate Conference of the Parties (COP33) in 2028, New Delhi may have lost an opportunity to lead discussions on such options in the wake of the war, but it must take advantage of other such forums to do so. History as policy guide Lessons from history are worth revisiting. In 1966, U.S.
