Category: Editorial
Title: Indias two youths Why gap between unemployed Part Two

India's two youths: Why gap between unemployed graduates and credit score chasers matters

"Salary growth in traditional IT services roles has remained relatively flat in recent years, while AI, data science, and cloud roles command a premium of Rs 5 lakh-Rs 10 lakh per year over standard entry-level roles. This has led to a bifurcated compensation structure, where high-demand digital skills drive outsized salary growth, while generic roles see slower increases," Chengappa said. These disparities matter because today's youth shoulder the uneasy burden of driving the economy forward with their demographic dividend.

And they, more than previous generations, must have the skills to respond to a rapidly changing work environment, according to new research by JustJobs Network and JPMorganChase. Why? Because today's youth will change occupations "multiple times in their lifetimes". As such, their skills need to be transferable.

The demographic dividend window A high growth rate can, for some time, hide the failure to create a sufficient number of jobs or impart requisite skills. But India currently has around 400 million people in the 15-29 years age bracket. And when these youngsters grow old, it will be a social and financial burden unlike any other.

Even China, which grew at an unprecedented pace for the better part of three decades, is now feeling the heat, with youth unemployment as high as 16.9% in March. And with a rising number of Chinese workers having taken up gig work  - despite its non-existent social security and lack of stability  -  the future with more and more AI in it does not bode well for the labour market. In India, the case is not dissimilar, but with a key difference: the population is growing; China's shrunk by more than 3 million in 2025.

The need for meaningful employment and the gap between the demand for jobs and their availability are not new. But "considering that India has a rather short time-frame of about 10 to 15 years to leverage its distinctive youth bulge before the demographic shift towards an ageing population takes place, policymakers must urgently implement sufficient measures to address this pressing issue," think-tank People Research on India's Consumer Economy warned last year. Written by: Siddharth Upasani
