Category: Editorial
Title: India is the pharmacy of the world But we Part Two

India is the pharmacy of the world. But we are losing the drug development race

There is a proven approach that can eliminate this bottleneck. For Phase I & II clinical trials, we propose that any hospital, medical college, or university, as well as research institutes such as those under ICMR, CSIR, and DBT, should be empowered to set up their own subject-expert committee for clinical trials. These SECs would need to be registered with CDSCO and have a specific minimum composition, including a medical doctor, a biomedical researcher, a pharmaceutical manufacturing expert, and a biostatistician.

Biotech and pharmaceutical companies developing new medicines would be able to choose any registered SEC to apply to, and any such SEC would be able to give permission to start an early-phase clinical trial. CDSCO would be notified, but would not participate in the decision-making. CDSCO already goes through a similar process for registering ethics committees, and could create such a process for SECs via updated rules without the need for new legislation.

This is the same approach that Australia has used for 30 years, without any worse safety outcomes than the US. Australian clinical trial data is considered gold-standard across the world, and many countries are moving towards that approach to clinical trial regulation, including the US, where this is part of the Senate health committee's current package of proposed reforms. This body of evidence and global acceptance demonstrates that the proposed approach of distributing the scrutiny of clinical trials across multiple qualified bodies has the potential to massively accelerate the pace of pharmaceutical innovation in India without at all compromising patient safety; indeed, patients may well be better protected by decentralised expert committees acting in parallel, each with the time to deeply and thoroughly review the few applications in front of them, rather than a single committee overburdened with every file at once.

If we don't adopt an approach of this kind to accelerate clinical trial approvals, India runs the risk of falling forever behind in the field of medicine. Western pharmaceutical companies aren't interested in developing a vaccine against adult TB, a cure for oral cancer, or treatments for other life-threatening diseases that are highly concentrated in India, so crores of Indians will continue to die from these diseases each decade. India's health will be controlled by the West and China, with access to new medicines gated behind unaffordable prices and rising geopolitical barriers, and we may be left defenceless in the face of rising biosecurity threats enabled by the same AI that is now accelerating drug development.

If we adopt this approach and eliminate the main bottleneck to conducting clinical trials in India, India can and will lead the world in developing novel medicines. By Soham Sankaran and Anupam Manur Sankaran is founder, PopVax, an Indian full-stack biotech developing novel vaccines and immunotherapies using generative AI. Manur is professor of Economics, Takshashila Institution
