Category: Editorial
Title: Indias FTAs will work better than before Part Two

India's FTAs will work better than before

Post-Covid deals have been more effective, so prospects with the UK and US augur well. The geopolitical scenario has changed and the tariff issue has made countries talk to one another more often than before. The World Trade Organization is now an acknowledged failure. But the tariff shock has led countries to sign FTAs among themselves to act as a buffer against the US backlash, which is a good development.

In a way, the US president has brought countries closer to one another, which will foster higher levels of trade. More importantly, countries have begun lowering their tariff rates. Although the lower rates are restricted to those signing deals, they have fostered a culture of openness in imports and therefore trade.

On the positive side, the markets in India have reacted very well. The currency also has been a beneficiary as one of the main reasons for the rupee coming under relentless pressure was the absence of a deal with the US. Now that a formal agreement is on the anvil, the rupee has steadied and will be a comfort for the Reserve Bank which has otherwise had to deal with steadying it often.

While there have been fluctuations in the stock market, the general thrust has been positive since the India-US deal was announced. This augurs well for foreign portfolio investors. One of the reasons for their muted activity in the Indian market was the uncertainty surrounding the deal. Now, hopefully it will be business as usual.

FTAs between countries and blocs will be the new normal in the coming years, galvanised by the US action on tariffs. This is welcome from the point of view of fostering a new global economic order where freer trade with fewer restrictions would hold. While the fate of goods appears to be more straightforward, services is one area that has to be focused upon in future.

By Madan Sabnavis, Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda
