Category: Editorial
Title: India is the pharmacy of the world But we Part One

India is the pharmacy of the world. But we are losing the drug development race

World. But we are losing the drug development race To lead the AI-driven biotech revolution, we must dismantle a centralised regulatory bottleneck that lets China and the US outpace us by years In the US, clinical-trial approval from the FDA usually takes 30 days. Under China's investigator-initiated trial framework, many first-in-human clinical trials don't require the approval of the regulator at all, allowing them to start faster still.

In India, it can take as much as two years just to get approval to start a clinical trial. By the time a firm starts a Phase I trial in India, the Chinese counterpart working on the same target would already have Phase II clinical data and have licensed their drug to Novartis for a billion dollars  -  a blistering pace that has made China the global leader in early-stage drug development. This is a huge problem in our fast-moving era, with Generative AI revolutionising the design of medicines, cutting development timelines from years to months, and opening a path to preventing and curing diseases that kill millions of people each year but have resisted conventional approaches.

AI also makes possible the democratisation of truly personalised medicines against terminal cancer, lifelong autoimmune conditions, and genetic diseases. India, replete with both computer science talent and biologics expertise, is perfectly positioned to benefit from the convergence of AI and medicine  -  our biotech companies can leapfrog legacy pharmaceutical giants with a remarkably rapid and efficient AI-first approach to drug design and development. While the potential exists, unfortunately, India is losing the drug development race.

Despite being the pharmacy of the world  -  the largest manufacturer of generic medicines, which save millions of lives across the world each year  - Indian firms don't develop novel medicines. The big money in pharma is in new medicines, not old ones, which explains the sobering statistic that the entire Indian pharmaceutical industry's yearly revenue is approximately $50 billion, while Merck, a single US pharma company, makes approximately $64 billion. The biggest impediment to the development of new medicines in India is the clinical-trial regulatory framework.

There are fewer than 40 first-in-human Phase I clinical trials of novel pharmaceuticals each year in India, in comparison with 800-plus in the US, and 1,000-plus in China. Our Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) refers clinical trial applications to subject expert committees (SECs) for advice on approval. There is only one SEC for each area of medicine  -  they typically take at least six months, and sometimes years, to approve clinical trial applications, instead of the few weeks it takes in the US and China.

The government is aware that things need to change. In his Independence Day speech last year, the Prime Minister challenged the nation to research and develop the "most effective medicines for the welfare of mankind." In this year's budget speech, the Finance Minister announced the innovation-focused Biopharma SHAKTI initiative, which includes strengthening CDSCO to meet global approval timeframes. Unfortunately, as new AI-powered startups develop ever more novel medicines at an accelerating pace, even the increased reviewer capacity she has promised will likely not be enough to process these trial applications fast enough.
