Category: Editorial
Title: Indias quest for energy Atmanirbharta Part Two

India's quest for energy Atmanirbharta

Some critics may argue that with this policy initiative, India is moving away from clean energy. However, energy security and energy transition are not necessarily mutually exclusive objectives. The prolonged dependence of heavy transport, aviation, shipping, and petrochemicals on hydrocarbons underscores the strategic urgency of bolstering domestic energy output and production capacity over imported fuels.

Another argument is that domestic production is not a quick substitute for import security, and the scheme's own six-year horizon concedes this fact. Deepwater and ultra-deepwater exploration, which Samudra Manthan is designed to accelerate, are globally among the most expensive hydrocarbon initiatives. In addition, they require quite advanced and complex technological support, big-term investment timelines, and stable policy frameworks.

Having said that, this new policy by the Modi government is pushing India's overarching energy transition from source diversification to import substitution by building home-grown offshore resources. The Samudra Manthan policy operationalises this strategic doctrine through three transformative takeaways. Firstly, it dismantles historic exploration bottlenecks by co-funding up to 50 per cent of high-risk deepwater drilling costs, catalysing substantial private and global upstream investments into this sector.

Secondly, scaling domestic crude and natural gas output constructs a reliable "strategic buffer" that insulates core industries like aviation, shipping, and heavy freight logistics from recurring supply chain disruptions. And thirdly, in the longer run, by drastically reducing the country's energy import bill, it preserves critical foreign exchange reserves, enabling India to reinvest sovereign capital into building state-of-the-art subsea infrastructure and indigenous industrial supply chains. More importantly, this can lead to developing domestic advanced naval capabilities, cementing our stature as a formidable maritime power in the Indian Ocean.

The fact that Samudra Manthan addresses the structural, decade-scale vulnerability in India's energy security is very significant and well timed. The scheme's success should be measured not against whether it makes India self-sufficient, but whether it narrows, even if incrementally, the gap between a growing economy's appetite for oil and the barrels that India imports globally. Thus, Samudra Manthan is not a stand-alone policy initiative but part of a broader policy strategy to maximise every viable domestic energy resource and aim for self-reliance in energy security for India in the near future.

Samudra Manthan can be best seen as India's long term policy response to disruptions in the global energy supplies chains, aiming to convert demonstrated vulnerabilities into a long term industrial project. Pushing for local exploration is not just an economic or policy goal but a geopolitical imperative Abhishek Pratap Singh is an Assistant Professor at Deshbandhu College, University of Delhi, and Kaustubh Tripathi is a Research Associate at VisvaNiti Foundation, New Delhi; Views presented are personal.
