Category: Editorial
Title: Indias AI push gets real with strategic pivot

India's AI push gets real with strategic pivot

Budget identifies sovereign AI and scalable technologies as priorities to realise Viksit Bharat vision By utilising technology and artificial intelligence as the backbone to advance the vision of Viksit Bharat, Budget 2026 strikes a fine balance between ambition and inclusion. The strategic roadmap ensures that digital transformation is more than a lofty goal; it is a tool for equitable development. At a time when the world faces heightened economic uncertainty, this Budget identifies sovereign AI and scalable technologies as its strategic priorities.

The approach anchors national progress towards technological self-reliance to realise the Viksit Bharat vision. A key need for India has been truly inclusive growth. A growth engine that encourages the use of technology across the country, be it in large cities or smaller centres. However, the roadblocks to this democratisation through technology have centred on a lack of awareness and education.

The government has identified this as a key pain point and is addressing it through a high-powered committee that will identify areas of growth, including an impact assessment of AI on jobs and skill requirements. Tech firms on the fast track Indian tech companies are growing at a breakneck speed, with consolidated annual revenue projected to cross $280 billion in FY26, supported by a workforce of over six million. The country has solidified its position as a global nerve centre, hosting over 1,800 Global Capability Centres (GCCs), including more than 500 dedicated to AI, increasing opportunities to create jobs.

To consolidate these wins, the government has implemented several measures to champion emerging technologies. These include over ₹10,300 crore allocated for the IndiaAI Mission, ₹6,003.65 crore outlay for the National Quantum Mission, and ₹14,000 crore set aside for the Anusandhan National Research Fund, alongside a dedicated capital pool of ₹1 lakh crore for the Research, Development and Innovation Scheme. Technology and innovation require a financial system that is accessible and affordable.

The Budget announced an expert committee to review the sector and introduce reforms to align it with market needs, while empowering NBFCs to enable efficient credit disbursement and rapid technology adoption. A much-needed reform in Foreign Exchange Management Rules will streamline cross-border capital flows and simplify FDI compliance for fintechs. To zoom out, this Budget is a strategic pivot that will revolutionise India's tech-native economy, bridge the gap between education, employment, and enterprise.

The path forward requires unwavering commitment to implementation and stronger collaboration between the public and private sectors, particularly with digital-native organisations. Crucially, deeper collaboration between fintechs and the government will foster an agile regulatory landscape and serve as a key accelerator for next-gen digital public infrastructure. India will not just scale existing models but also reinvent the new global standard.

The future belongs to those who build, and India is ready to lead. By Harshil Mathur The writer is CEO and Co-Founder, Razorpay
