Category: Editorial
Title: India rejected Indus Waters Treaty ruling Part One

India rejected Indus Waters Treaty ruling. Why it still helps Pakistan

Treaty ruling. Why it still helps Pakistan The Court of Arbitration has recently ruled against India over the Indus Waters Treaty. This court has no means to get its orders enforced. So what is the future of the water-sharing dispute? The Permanent Court of Arbitration, adjudicating on a dispute raised by Pakistan on the Indus Waters Treaty, has passed two more orders against India.

It has ruled that India's decision to put the Treaty in 'abeyance' was "not permissible under the Treaty or other applicable rules of international law", and therefore the Treaty  -  which governs the sharing of six transboundary river waters between the two countries  -  remained "fully in force" and India continued to be bound by it. Additionally, the Court also directed India to halt construction work at the Ratle Hydroelectric Project, as requested by Pakistan, till the technical dispute over it is finally settled. The two orders were expected by the Indian government.

India has not been participating in this arbitration process, underway for four years, having maintained that the Court was constituted in violation of the provisions of the Treaty. A neutral expert had already been appointed to adjudicate on the same issue, and the Treaty does not allow parallel resolution processes on the same dispute. As such, India said the Court lacked legitimacy and refused to recognise its existence or proceedings.

It did not appoint its two arbitrators on the Court. Nonetheless, having been constituted, the Court went ahead with its proceedings, with two arbitrators appointed by Pakistan, and three 'umpires' nominated by institutions mentioned in the Treaty. India's rejection India's reaction to the two orders on Monday was, therefore, on expected lines.

"This so called Court was constituted by the World Bank in patent breach of the terms of the Treaty and India categorically rejects its so-called award… India has never recognised the existence in law of this illegally-constituted and so-called Court of Arbitration… India's decision to hold the Indus Waters Treaty in abeyance remains in force," the Ministry of External Affairs said. The two set of rulings on Monday happened to be the fourth 'award' from the Court of Arbitration, all, unsurprisingly, going in favour of Pakistan. In its earlier 'awards', the Court, constituted in September 2022, has, among other things, declared itself to be competent enough to adjudicate on the matter, rejecting India's arguments to the contrary made in a letter to the World Bank in December 2022, and also held that its decisions were final and binding upon the parties.

India has rejected all the earlier 'awards' as and when they were made, the last one in May of this year. With Monday's order, the Court has likely finished its work, having addressed all the issues raised by Pakistan. The Court has no means to get its orders enforced, and therefore, its orders will not bring about any material change in the prevailing situation on this issue, considering India's position.

For Pakistan, however, the Court orders are invaluable. It is almost sure to use these to rake up the issue at every relevant international forum, and also to drive up hysteria against India within the country. These orders are extremely important documents for it to explore further legal options at the international level.
