Category: Editorial
Title: Indias Goldilocks moment is over macro Part Two

India's Goldilocks moment is over, macro situation will worsen

Unfortunately, this time, net FDI flows are also very weak. India's net FDI flows (gross investment less repatriation and outwards FDI) were at just $1.7 billion in April-January 2025-26, following a subdued inflow of $1 billion in 2024-25. While gross FDI inflows have been healthy, a sharp rise in repatriation of profits by foreign investors and high outward FDI by Indian investors have resulted in muted net FDI flows.

Other components of the capital account like external commercial borrowing have also been weak. This has resulted in the total capital account balance in the first three quarters of 2025-26 being close to zero, and is likely to take India's balance of payments into negative territory. This will have implications for the Indian currency, which has already weakened sharply over the past year.

India has large forex reserves of around $700 billion. However, adjusting for gold holdings and SDRs, it falls to about $570 billion, and further adjusting for the RBI's forward position, the number falls to just below $500 billion. So far, it is still comfortable, providing more than eight months of import cover.

The West Asia crisis will also result in increased fiscal burden. The cut in excise duty on petrol and diesel will result in a revenue loss for the Centre. Moreover, there will be upward pressure on the fertiliser subsidy given the sharp rise in LNG prices. In fact, there could also be some pressure on the government's other tax revenues, as the growth momentum slows.

Overall, we feel that the fiscal burden of the West Asia crisis on the Centre could be around 0.5 per cent of GDP. The uncertain environment will also make it difficult for the Centre to meet its disinvestment target. All this could disturb its fiscal consolidation path. State governments' finances were already under pressure with rising expenditure towards election-related doles and cash transfers; the crisis could put further strain on their finances.

As the Centre and states struggle to meet their deficit targets, capital expenditure could come under pressure. The West Asia crisis has hit India at a time when the country was relatively better placed in terms of macro fundamentals. The government and central bank have announced some measures to shield the economy in the short run.

But, for the medium to long term, this crisis has highlighted the urgent need for India to strengthen its energy security. The events of the last few years have emphasised the need to build broader resilience to all kinds of global supply disruptions. India also needs to ensure that capital flows are stable.

This requires making the country an attractive investment destination. Written by: Rajani Sinha The writer is chief economist, CareEdge Ratings
