Category: Editorial
Title: Indias moment to restoring balance to Part One

India's moment to restoring balance to copyright

Rigid copyright laws are undermining access, creativity and technological progress The India-AI Impact Summit 2026 is on in New Delhi and I am reminded of a story. A former colleague, Nirmita, who is visually impaired, once found herself in an absurd legal position. She could not legally purchase a book from the United States in a disability-friendly format called DAISY (Digital Accessible Information System), even though I, as a sighted reader, was able to purchase any print or e-books I wished.

This was because of the vagaries of copyright law. To address this issue, our non-governmental organisation, together with international coalitions of disability rights organisations, engaged in years of advocacy at the international level. These efforts ultimately led to the creation of the Marrakesh Treaty, which enables the cross-border exchange of accessible-format books as well as national exceptions for visually impaired persons to use technology to convert books into accessible formats when publishers do not make them available.

The copyright industry  -  from book publishers to the movie industry  -  strongly opposed the treaty, which sought to establish a 'right to read' for visually impaired persons as any exception to copyright law was viewed as fundamentally unacceptable, even if it was at the expense of denying access to the visually impaired. It is now copyright maximalism The struggle of visually impaired persons against overly rigid copyright laws highlights a fundamental problem: copyright has expanded far beyond its original purpose, and copyright maximalism now actively obstructs the creation of and access to knowledge. This debate has taken on a renewed vigour thanks to Artificial Intelligence (AI) models, many of which turn out to be useful only when they have large quantities of training data (which, for language models, inevitably means copyrighted works).

But before looking at AI, copyright needs to be understood in a historical perspective. We have had art for far longer than we have had copyright. The Statute of Anne, widely seen as the first copyright law, was passed in Britain in 1710, after the era of Shakespeare and Milton. The British brought copyright law to India in 1847.

The current Copyright Act is from 1957. In 1710, the law granted authors a limited monopoly of 14 years, with the possibility of one renewal. The monopoly right would only vest if it was specifically registered and multiple copies of the book deposited for distribution among libraries and universities.

Under the current law, the monopoly right goes well beyond the act of publishing, vests automatically the moment 'a work' is created, and lasts for the author's entire lifetime plus 70 years posthumously. So, the thousands of random Instagram posts and notebook doodles that you have made are all protected under copyright law for centuries. While the public domain was once the default, now a nearly-perpetual copyright monopoly is the default, regardless of the commercial potential of the work or ambitions of the creator.

This fundamental change in the nature of the law has deleterious consequences. Findings from a study As part of a research project by LIRNEasia, a Sri Lankan think tank, we studied the data governance regimes of seven countries in South and Southeast Asia. With respect to copyright, we found that in four out of seven, the law made web search engines and AI training illegal.
