Category: Editorial
Title: India must draw a red line on US unilateral Part One

India must draw a red line on U.S. unilateral sanctions

U.S. unilateral sanctions The dust - nuclear and otherwise - has yet to settle on how the United States-Israel war against Iran will ultimately end, but its impact on India's growth projections is evident. Already reeling from U.S. tariffs, the Indian economy has seen damage pile up due to the U.S.-Israel initiation of the war, Iran's targeting of Gulf countries, and now the 'double blockade' of the Strait of Hormuz by the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) and U.S.

forces  -  manifested in rising energy bills, higher shipping and insurance costs, supply chain disruptions, a slump in exports (down 7% in March), and mounting inflation. The rupee's fall has resulted in India slipping from being projected to fourth spot, to sixth in terms of the largest economies rankings, according to the International Monetary Fund. Break sanction alignment India is by no means the only country thus affected, but as the world's most populous nation, it is bound to feel the effects more acutely.

Given the little attention that the U.S. has paid to India's economic concerns, it is surprising that the Narendra Modi government continues to pay heed to U.S. unilateral sanctions amid the war. This month, as temporary waivers on many of those sanctions come up for renewal, it is time for New Delhi to unequivocally denounce them and declare that it will no longer abide by them.

A cursory list of U.S. sanctions which India has partially or fully complied with is both illustrative and eye-opening. Since May 2019, India has not purchased any Iranian or Venezuelan oil following U.S. President Donald Trump's demand for 'zeroing out'. India faced similar secondary sanctions from the U.S., during 2012-14, when the Barack Obama administration used them as leverage in Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) negotiations (the Iran nuclear deal).

While India reduced its imports of Iranian oil from about 18.5 million tonnes in 2010-2011 to 11 million tonnes in 2013-2014, it never agreed to halt them altogether. In 2015, following the signing of the JCPOA, India stepped up its oil imports again and also signed a strategic connectivity trilateral agreement with Iran and Afghanistan to develop the Chabahar port, along with road and rail links connecting it to Afghanistan and Central Asia. Early in his second term in 2025, Mr.

Trump pushed India to end all its imports of Russian oil, adding a 25% penalty on top of existing 25% tariffs to enforce his demand. For three months  -  from November 2025 to February 2026  -  India complied, halving its intake of about two million barrels per day (bpd) to one million bpd. As the U.S.

has issued temporary sanctions waivers to deal with oil price hikes during the war with Iran, India has increased its intake of both Russian and Iranian oil, but will have to decide what to do once the waivers end. Since the U.S. kidnapping of Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro in January 2026 and the subsequent easing of sanctions, India's intake of Venezuelan oil has also increased.

Meanwhile, the U.S.'s waiver extension on India's use of Chabahar port is set to expire on April 26. Mr. Trump has also said that he intends to impose sanctions on any country conducting trade with Iran or holding Iranian funds, and will sanction all BRICS members if they seek to establish a non-dollar payment mechanism among themselves.
