Category: Editorial
Title: Is the RBIs inflation formula helping or Part One

Is the RBI's inflation formula helping or hurting you?

India's monetary policy framework witnessed evolution over the years with no such frameworks during first few decades post-independence. India's monetary policy framework witnessed evolution over the years with no such frameworks during first few decades post-independence.

The Banking Regulation Act 1949 was enacted, followed by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) operationalizing the traditional tools  -  Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), Bank rate, Cash Reserve requirements (CRR), Open Market Operations, etc. From 1960s through the mid-1980s, India has seen Credit planning and from mid 1980s through the late 1990s, RBI employed "monetary, targeting with feedback" framework coinciding with financial sector reforms. Though Price stability was key objective, inflation remained double digit.

After liberalisation, the RBI considered additional macroeconomic variables  - credit growth, exchange rate, trade balance, in addition to trends in growth and inflation. After FRBM Act enactment, interest rate gradually became the key policy tool. RBI introduced liquidity adjustment facility in 1999 followed by inflation targeting.

An expert committee recommended to the RBI to manage liquidity by offering term repos of different tenors. The FY1990-91 witnessed around 13 per cent inflation, one of the highest, reducing to 8.3 per cent in 2011- 12, the global financial crisis period. In 2013, inflation slipped to double-digit due to oil price fluctuations and domestic supply irregularities.

Thus, these were phases of monetary instability in India. In 2016, India adopted the Flexible Inflation Targeting (FIT) framework. The Preamble in the RBI Act, as amended by the Finance Act, 2016, provides that the primary objective of the monetary policy is to maintain price stability, while keeping in mind the objective of growth.

As per Section 45ZA of the RBI Act, the Central Government shall, in consultation with RBI, determine the inflation target in terms of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), once in every five years. The extant framework has served India well over the last ten years despite multiple challenges viz; Covid-19 & Russia-Ukraine conflict. The inflation levels witnessed a distinct decline during the FIT period - 7.3 per cent over pre-FIT period (Jan 2012 to Sept 2016) to 4.7 per cent (Oct 2016 to Oct 2025).

FIT helped enhance the monetary policy credibility, instilling investor confidence. In this direction, the Government of India notified inflation target for the period from April 1, 2026, to March 31, 2031, retaining the CPI inflation target at 4 per cent with an upper tolerance level of 6 per cent and a lower tolerance level of 2 per cent. FIT period till date reveals that RBI hasn't become hawkish in its approach towards inflation management, rather, became more data oriented, professional and comprehensive.

A strong accountability framework The framework incorporates a strong accountability mechanism. In the event of failure to maintain inflation within the band for three consecutive quarters, as provided under Section 45ZN of the RBI Act, RBI is required to submit a detailed report to the Government of India setting out the reasons for such failure, the remedial actions proposed to be taken, and the estimated time period within which the inflation target would be achieved. This will further reinforce policy discipline and support inclusive and resilient growth.

Inflation is a sustained increase in the general price level of goods and services in economy over a period of time. When the price level rises, each unit of currency buys fewer goods and services; reflecting a reduction in the purchasing power, a loss of real value in the medium of exchange and unit of account within the economy. FIT is a pro-welfare measure that safeguards the purchasing power of households, particularly vulnerable sections, by ensuring low and stable inflation.
