Category: Editorial
Title: Israel the US and a war to build a unipolar Part Two

Israel, the U.S. and a war to build a unipolar West Asia

Saddam Hussein's Iraq is gone. Qadhafi's Libya is gone. Bashar al-Assad is in Moscow while a former jihadist is running Damascus. Hezbollah has been weakened. Hamas has been pushed to the ruins of Gaza. The Arab countries are unlikely to do anything other than issue condemnation letters. Iran is the last revisionist power standing.

If the Islamic Republic is taken down, the regional balance of power would shift, setting the stage for a unipolar West Asia, with Israel, fully backed by Washington, at its centre. This is more about geopolitics and Israel's own interests than about giving freedom to the Iranians. Decapitation strategy But there is one problem.

Iran, ring-fenced by tall mountains and roughly 70 times bigger than Israel, is a geographical fortress. Israel alone cannot bring about regime change. Typically, regime changes are achieved through a ground invasion  -  even then it is not guaranteed. Israel pulverised Gaza, a strip of land sandwiched between Israel and the Mediterranean Sea for 24 months and killed at least 70,000 of its people, but has still not unseated Hamas.

No country, including the U.S., wants to send ground troops to Iran. If an Iraq-style ground invasion is not possible, the other options are Libya or Syria. But in Libya and Syria, there was armed opposition to the regime that led the battle on the ground. In Libya, it took months-long bombing by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to topple Qadhafi's regime.

In Syria, which fell into a disastrous civil war in 2012, it took 12 years for Mr. Assad to fall. In Iran, there is no organised armed opposition. So, what Israel tried to do in June 2025 and February 2026 was to carry out decapitation strikes  -  give a blow so heavy that the regime would not stand up and fight back.

In June 2025, the Iranians recovered from the initial shock fast and began hitting back. Mr. Netanyahu had said that regime change would be a desirable outcome of the war, but he had to ask for American help and then agree to a ceasefire after 12 days. In February 2026, backed by a more willing U.S., Israel has launched a much broader and more ambitious strike, killing Khamenei.

Mr. Trump and Mr. Netanyahu want a quick, decisive victory. But if they thought the assassination of the "leader of the revolution" would lead to the crowds jamming the streets and taking over the institutions bringing down the regime, that has not happened  -  not as yet. Iran seems prepared for this moment, and is hitting back at American bases across the region, and Israel, widening the war.

A regional war During the 2025 June war, Iran's response was mainly focused on Israel. It launched a token strike on the U.S. base in Qatar following an American attack on its nuclear facilities and subsequently agreed to a ceasefire. But this time, Iran is hitting American bases across the Persian Gulf kingdoms and Israel.

Iranian missiles and drones have targeted a military base in Cyprus and a French base in the United Arab Emirates. Iran has also announced the shutting of the Strait of Hormuz, the narrow chokepoint connecting the Persian Gulf with the Arabian Sea through which a third of the global energy supply flows. This is a risky gamble.
