Category: Editorial
Title: Israel the US and a war to build a unipolar Part One

Israel, the U.S. and a war to build a unipolar West Asia

To build a unipolar West Asia This is a perilous conflict that is more about geopolitics and shaped by Tel Aviv's own interests On February 27, Oman's Foreign Minister Badr bin Hamad Al Busaidi, who was mediating talks between the United States and Iran, told an American channel that a deal was within reach. He said Iran had committed not to make a nuclear bomb "ever" and not to stockpile nuclear material. The next day, the U.S.

and Israel began bombing Iran, killing its Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and dozens of senior Iranian officials. Israel described the campaign as a "pre-emptive" war to remove "existential threats", while U.S. President Donald Trump urged Iranians to "take over your government," adding, "This will probably be your only chance for generations." It was clear from the way the initial decapitation strike was carried out and the remarks issued by Mr.

Trump and Mr. Netanyahu, that what the invading bloc wanted was regime change. The Iranian government, despite the initial blow, has reorganised itself and is hitting back. West Asia, as a result of the actions of Mr. Trump and Mr. Netanyahu, is witnessing one of its most perilous moments in the post-Second World War era  -  a conflict whose outcome will define the region for the decades to come.

After the 12-day war in June 2025, Mr. Trump announced that he had "obliterated" Iran's nuclear programme. Mr. Netanyahu declared a "historic victory". So, why did they start another war eight months later? Israel has always wanted regime change in Iran. For Tel Aviv, Iran is the only revisionist country that challenges its supremacy in West Asia.

Arab countries, many of them hosting American bases or dependent on American aid, have either established direct ties with Israel or accepted to live with Israel's militarism and its occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories. But Israel sees Iran, a country of 90 million people with enormous economic potential and an advanced missile programme, as an existential threat. When then U.S.

President Barack Obama signed the nuclear deal with Iran in 2015, his focus was on addressing Iran's nuclear programme. He believed that a non-nuclear Iran would be good news for West Asia, where a "cold peace" between Tehran and its adversaries would be established. But, Israel had a different understanding.

Its problem was not merely Iran's nuclear programme but its conventional might. That is why Mr. Netanyahu opposed the 2015 deal with all his might. Geopolitics of Iran In recent times, when the U.S. and Iran were engaged in talks, Israel had repeatedly called for a deal to include Iran's missile programme and its support for non-state militias in the region.

What Mr. Netanyahu wanted was a total disarmament of Iran  -  a demand no Iranian leader, except someone installed by Mr. Netanyahu in Tehran  -  can accept. A Tehran-based security analyst told The Hindu on February 24 in unmistakable terms that Iran would not sign a deal with the U.S. on its nuclear programme.

He said, "If Iran agrees to surrender its ballistic missiles today to avert war with the U.S., Israel will bomb us anyway a few months down the line. So, the question Iranians ask themselves is why should they give up their last deterrent?" The only way Israel could meet all its objectives was to bring about a regime change. Regime change would also be geopolitically rewarding.
