Category: Editorial
Title: Its not the end of the story Part One

It's not the end of the story

India is vulnerable to more unilateral tariff actions from the US due to its membership of BRICS and trade with Iran The official confirmation of the US and India having finalised a bilateral trade deal comes within a week of India pulling off a free trade agreement (FTA) with the European Union (EU). The timing of the announcement of the US deal, therefore, is significant. It might also be the "Brussels effect" brushing off on Washington.

What does the conclusion of the deal finally bring home? India's biggest relief will come from the US tariff cuts. Reciprocal tariffs of 25% on Indian exports will be rolled back to 18%, bringing them on a par with those on most exports from South Asia and East Asia. The additional 25% tariffs on India for buying Russian oil is also expected to be rescinded, bringing further relief for exports to the US market.

India, in return, is expected to purchase large amounts of US exports, especially energy, tech and agricultural products. President Trump's post on Truth Social suggests such purchases will be around $500 billion. In addition, as demanded by the US for long, India will significantly reduce its purchase of Russian oil, increase crude purchases from Venezuela, and lower its own trade barriers on domestic sectors of US export interest.

The key interest in the deal now will be in checking its content, especially what India conceded in terms of market access, and what it obtained in return. This will be especially important given the spate of FTAs India has signed recently. There will be great interest in comparing the relative concessions that India has offered in its various FTAs.

While waiting for the details, it is important to take a step back and look at how the deal evolved. It is almost exactly a year ago in February 2025, when Prime Minister Modi visited Washington. He was one of the earliest global leaders to meet President Trump in person after the latter's second entry into the Oval Office.

The joint statement released on the occasion of the visit indicated a mutual intention to negotiate the first tranche of a mutually beneficial bilateral trade agreement by the fall of 2025. The multi-sector agreement, as the joint statement further suggested, would work on increasing bilateral trade in goods and services by cutting down tariff and non-tariff barriers and deepening supply chain integration. The trade agreement was expected to fulfil the goal of Mission 500  -  aiming to double bilateral trade to $500 billion in 2030.

The statement also appreciated the mutual efforts made till then to increase bilateral trade. These included India's lowering of tariffs on bourbon, motorcycles and tech products, and the US's measures for enhancing Indian exports of mangoes and pomegranates. India's benefits/costs from the trade deal will eventually enter into what the US should be evaluated on the basis of conditions that existed last February.

In February 2025, the US had not pronounced reciprocal countrywide tariffs. These were announced in April and kicked in from August. Most of the countries that were imposed with reciprocal tariffs were able to cut deals with the US. In almost all cases, the initial reciprocal tariffs were reduced. India was a notable exception.
