Category: Editorial
Title: Its not the end of the story Part Two

It's not the end of the story

Not only did India not reach a deal with the US, but it also got slapped with additional 25% secondary Russian tariffs. With 50% tariffs facing a large chunk of its exports, especially the labour-intensive ones, India's negotiating room was significantly cramped. The core objective of negotiations shifted to complying with US demands, which had to be fulfilled for withdrawing the tariffs.

With the goalposts having shifted while the game was on, India's hopes of getting concessions from the US, over and above the situation that existed in February 2025, were effectively demolished. Obviously, this was so not just for India but for many of its competitor economies from South and Southeast Asia. In India's case, however, two factors made the pill more bitter.

The first was India getting reciprocal tariffs in April even while it was negotiating a deal with the US from before. The second were the additional Russian tariffs. There were signals of US demands being met by India over the last few months. This included a long-term deal signed by Indian state-owned oil marketing companies for buying more than 2 million metric tonnes of liquefied petroleum gas in 2026.

Another significant step was the Indian parliament amending the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act by removing supplier liability and bringing in an upper threshold for operator liabilities. These measures ensure greater energy trade between India and the US along with establishing enabling conditions for more US energy investments in India. Considering that India has already reduced its purchase of Russian oil, it has been effectively complying with US demands for quite some time.

The details of the deal will reveal what more India will concede and what it might obtain in return. But the conclusion of the deal should not bring in strategic complacency. India is vulnerable to more unilateral tariff actions from the US due to its membership of the BRICS and trade with Iran. Furthermore, the recent example of Korea being threatened with additional tariffs for being late in fulfilling the conditions of the trade deal it signed with the US should also be taken note of.

Reaching a deal with the US might not mean the end of the story at all. Rather it should be looked at, at best, as a temporary pause. India should continue its efforts to diversify and de-risk by seeking FTAs with other countries. Views are personal. By AMITENDU PALIT Senior Research Fellow and Research Lead (trade and economics), Institute of South Asian Studies, National University of Singapore
