Category: Editorial
Title: Keep alcohol tobacco out of lowduty trade

Keep alcohol, tobacco out of low-duty trade deals

Low-duty trade deals Trade policy cannot trump the Constitution. The gains from tariff cuts are washed away by costs to health, family and society As India steps up its global trade talks (bilateral free trade pacts or broader arrangements), there is a temptation to treat all commodities as equal bargaining chips. The discourse revolves around market access, tariff reductions and investor confidence.

Yet there is one line that India must not cross: allowing foreign alcohol and tobacco products to enter the country at low customs duties. This is not merely a question of economics or protectionism. It is a constitutional, moral, and public health imperative. The Constitution is unambiguous on the role of the State in relation to intoxicating and harmful substances.

Article 47, one of the Directive Principles of State Policy, explicitly directs the State to "endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to health." While Directive Principles are not justiciable, they are fundamental to the governance of the country and serve as guiding principles for any state policy. Trade negotiations, conducted in the name of national interest, cannot be exempt from this constitutional responsibility. Alcohol and tobacco are not ordinary consumer goods.

Rather, they are among the important causes of preventable death and disease in India. Their harmfulness ranges from cancers, cardiovascular diseases, liver disorders, road traffic injuries, domestic violence, and loss of productivity. The WHO estimates, 40 million Indians are alcohol addicts. US Surgeon General has proposed a mandatory label on alcoholic beverages that alcohol causes seven types of cancers.

Health hazards The Lancet and the WHO now unequivocally state that only safe limit of drinking alcohol is zero drinking. Gujarat, Bihar, Nagaland and Mizoram have prohibition in place. Meanwhile, tobacco alone kills more than a million Indians each year, while alcohol use imposes enormous social and economic costs on families, particularly among the poor and women and children.

Any policy that makes these products cheaper, more accessible, or more socially acceptable contradicts the State's constitutional duty to protect public health and life and liberty of citizens. When customs duties on imported liquor and tobacco are slashed as part of trade deals, foreign brands become more affordable, more aggressively marketed  -  especially to youth. Global experience shows that transnational alcohol and tobacco corporations are very skilled at exploiting new markets with weak regulation.

When India agrees to lower tariffs on whisky, wine, cigarettes, or novel tobacco products, it sends a clear signal that revenue and trade relations matter more than health, social welfare, and even the Constitution. This goes against government's campaigns to reduce use of tobacco and alcohol. Trade negotiators often count tariff reductions as "wins" without accounting for the downstream fiscal and social costs borne by health systems, families, and society.

True economic rationality demands a full accounting  -  not just of trade flows. Public health exceptions under World Trade Organization rules and many bilateral agreements allow countries to restrict trade in products harmful to health. India, with its explicit constitutional directive, has an even stronger moral and legal basis to exclude alcohol and tobacco from low tariff treatment.

What India needs, therefore, is a clear red line in trade policy: alcohol and tobacco products must be removed from tariff-reduction commitments. Just as India has taken principled positions on access to medicines, generic drugs, and public health safeguards, it must now do the same for alcohol and tobacco. India has taken a tough stand on agri and dairy products as well.

At a time when non-communicable diseases are rising, healthcare systems are under strain, and families are grappling with the social fallout of addiction, trade policy cannot afford to be blind to its consequences. The long-term national interest requires the courage to say no to alcohol and tobacco in trade negotiations. By Dileep Mavalankar & Abhay Bang Dileep is public health expert and former director of Indian Institute of Public Health, Gandhinagar, and Bang is Director of SEARCH Gadhchiroli and a public health expert and activist for tribal health
