Category: Editorial
Title: Kharif concerns

Kharif concerns

Poor rain and acreage may impact rice, water availability The effects of a 15 per cent deficient monsoon this year  -  akin to 2002 and 2009 -  alongside a drop in acreage this kharif are already becoming evident. While retail food inflation is ruling at 6 per cent, this newspaper recently reported a 50 per increase in prices of fine and superfine varieties of rice in southern States. There has been a generalised rise in rice prices as well.

But there is another side to this retail price hike, which is of farmers not necessarily benefiting as much as traders when output is impacted. Wholesale food prices in August were up 5.67 per cent, lower than the overall WPI rise of nearly 10 per cent. Another report in this newspaper points to moong produce in Rajasthan not fetching good prices.

Market prices of pulses and oilseeds in particular often tend to rule below MSP. Therefore, the Centre and States may have to brace for a dual situation of food inflation and farm stress. A combination of untimely rain and moisture stress may have affected the tur crop in Karnataka. Market analysts expect a paddy output drop of at least 10 million tonnes over last kharif's 124.5 mt.

There are some short-term and long-term policy issues that arise from this situation of crop and water shortfall. With reservoir levels well below the norm, the Centre and States must draw up a plan for drought relief and water use with an eye on rabi requirements, while also considering curbs on industry and the urban sector. Paddy acreage for the country as a whole was down over 16 lakh hectares to 427 lakh hectares, with Karnataka and Telangana accounting for over half this fall.

This drop corresponds with the 21-43 per cent failure of the monsoon in the five southern States, way above the national average. Punjab and Haryana have recorded a shortfall of 39 per cent and 22 per cent, respectively, which may impact their paddy output, notwithstanding their irrigation coverage. Groundwater stress is likely to have increased everywhere.

To be sure, a rice buffer stock of 60 million tonnes implies that a dip in output is no cause for alarm on the food security front. Some of these stocks can be released as the festival season demand picks up. It is also worth considering whether an allocation of 7.2 million tonnes of broken rice as ethanol feedstock should be reduced in times such as these.

According to the All India Distillers' Association, maize (46 per cent) and FCI rice (22 per cent) account for most of the ethanol feedstock. While maize manages with less water, a price spike impacts the animal feed industry, which is a competing user. Ethanol demand can create imbalances, and the blending norm should perhaps be revisited in such times.

A shortfall this time should not be taken to mean that diversifying away from rice is a bad idea. It is important is to ensure that rice buffer stocks do not fall below, say, 40 mt. Millets should be pushed from the supply and demand side, and paddy grown with less water and inputs.
