Category: Editorial
Title: Know your investor

Know your investor

Accredited investors must be certified by independent body The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has been making several changes to its rules over the past year to enhance ease of doing business. In doing so, certain pain points experienced by investors, intermediaries and companies are being addressed. However, care should be taken to not remove guardrails in the regulatory framework.

SEBI's consultation paper on reviewing the Accredited Investor Framework is a case in point. The paper proposes a simpler way of onboarding accredited investors, but arguably paves the way for fund managers to misuse this route. The framework proceeds on the assumption that certain categories of individual investors are more market-savvy than the rest, and can be allowed to participate in investment products that are complex, carry higher risk and have lesser regulatory oversight.

These investors are allowed to invest in products such as alternative investment funds, portfolio management schemes and special situation funds, below the specified threshold. The proposed framework seeks to examine and alter the eligibility criteria to qualify as an accredited or elite investor. According to the existing rules, accredited investors need to meet certain annual income and net worth criteria.

The relevant documents are checked by an accreditation agency, which is a subsidiary of an exchange or depository. A certificate of accreditation is issued, which is given to the investment companies. SEBI has now proposed that the accreditation can be done by the investment fund where the investor proposes to invest.

It has argued that accreditation by an independent agency leads to duplication of work, is costly and that the number of accreditation agencies is few. However, there is an obvious conflict of interest when the investment fund certifies the investor. In a bid to get clients, due diligence can be given the go-by.

The process is, in fact, replicated (and not simplified) in the event of investment across companies and groups. A certificate by an investment manager would also carry less credibility than one by an independent agency. The eligibility of investors under the framework essentially revolves around the wealth of the investor.

The thresholds initially laid down were annual income of at least ₹2 crore or net worth of ₹7.5 crore or annual income of ₹1 crore and net worth of ₹5 crore. SEBI has suggested including another criterion  -  that half the net worth must be held in security market assets. This is a good idea; it is easier to verify securities market products, since the information is available digitally.

But it may also be prudent to test the market experience of the investor by stipulating that he should have a demat and trading account for more than seven years. This can act as a check against investors qualifying on the basis of inherited assets alone. Indeed, guardrails should not be compromised.
