Category: Editorial
Title: Lebanon yearns for peace and deliverance Part Two

Lebanon yearns for peace and deliverance

Within Lebanon, too, its political fortunes suffered, and the country was able to elect a Hezbollah-agnostic President and Prime Minister after a long hiatus. Under the new domestic political order, calls for disarming Hezbollah became more strident as the militia was seen more as the cause of the insecurity than as a self-proclaimed deterrent against Israel. Conflict and engagement Against this sombre backdrop, Israel and the U.S.

suddenly launched a joint air campaign against Iran on February 28, 2026, assassinating Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei in its first salvo. This shocked Hezbollah into attacking Israel with artillery, drones and missiles across the common border, breaking the 15-month ceasefire. The IDF responded in kind with intense air attacks on Hezbollah assets.

Both sides internalised the lessons of the last round: Hezbollah used the interregnum to recoup its losses and make operational changes to avoid intelligence leakages. It revived guerrilla tactics, conserving its assets for a long war of attrition. It adopted a decentralised command structure and toned down its political rhetoric.

The IDF initially avoided infantry engagements, deploying more armour and airpower. After an Iranian ceasefire was announced on April 8, Tehran demanded that Lebanon be brought under its ambit. To the contrary, IDF intensified its attacks on Hezbollah, launching "100 air strikes in 10 minutes" and demolishing buildings without prior notice.

The IDF depopulated much of the south to create, once again, a buffer zone south of the Litani river. After nine days of ferocious war, U.S. President Donald Trump declared a ceasefire on April 17. The announcement was preceded by a preliminary meeting on April 14 between the Israeli and Lebanese ambassadors in Washington, facilitated by U.S.

Secretary of State Marco Rubio. This engagement was noteworthy for many reasons. It was the first contact since the abortive Madrid process in the mid-1990s between the two states formally still at war. The meeting took place despite Hezbollah's stiff opposition and Iranian insistence on the matter being put under Iran-U.S.

ceasefire negotiations. There was considerable opposition within Israel to the ceasefire from hardliners who wanted Hezbollah defanged. In the end, the interests of both the U.S. and Israel in avoiding a wider conflagration prevailed. Hope amid prolonged crisis Lebanon today is a cautionary tale of nearly half a century of accumulated crises, with its ossified nomenclature swept under the carpet.

An early resolution of the Lebanese imbroglio is as elusive as it is important for the country, the entire region and beyond. More Lebanese live outside Lebanon than in the country itself. Further, Lebanon is the only Arab country with a significant proportion of Christians. In the past, tensions between various confessions have sucked in their co-religionist foreign backers, exacerbating the problems.

The converse is also true: Lebanese militias have often meddled abroad. Hezbollah, for instance, acted as a protector of Syria's al-Assad regime and stirred the Shias in the Gulf states and supported al-Houthis in Yemen. At its best, a multi-ethnic Lebanon was a model state with a tolerant, productive and prosperous society that Indians related to.

It was a civilisational bridge between Christian Europe and Muslim Arabs. It enriched the world beyond its microcosm  -  from philosopher Khalil Gibran to thinker Kamal Jumblatt and from historian Philip Hitti to Arabic singer Fairuz. The past half-century has tormented Lebanon with fratricidal civil wars overlaid with foreign causes.

The current ceasefire and talks offer a sliver of hope that this jinx has finally been broken and the country can reclaim its lost glory. By Mahesh Sachdev Retired Indian Ambassador with an interest in West Asia and oil matters
