Category: Editorial
Title: Lebanon yearns for peace and deliverance Part One

Lebanon yearns for peace and deliverance

Despite a tenuous ceasefire, Lebanon remains fragile; the scheduled second round of talks with Israel in Washington offers a sliver of hope The high-octane din of the ongoing Operation Epic Fury against Iran, which began on February 28, 2026, has largely subsumed an equally ferocious war being waged simultaneously in Lebanon. While this fracas between the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) and Lebanon's Hezbollah militia has some linkages to the Iranian imbroglio, it would be simplistic to regard it as a mere sideshow of the latter. The Lebanon conflict predates the formation of the Islamic Republic of Iran in 1979 and has its own background, drivers and ramifications.

A battleground Indeed, for much of its 83 years as an independent nation, Lebanon, with a current population of five million, has been used as a springboard for foreign causes against Israel, with which it shares a 79-km land border. Following the creation of Israel in 1948, nearly 1,00,000 Palestinians took refuge in Lebanon. They eventually led to the establishment of the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), based in Beirut, forming a state within the Lebanese state.

The PLO, under its Chairman Yasser Arafat, conducted guerrilla activities against Israel, provoking Israeli wrath against Lebanon. A civil war broke out in Lebanon in 1975, pushing ethnic identities over nationalism. The PLO joined the conflict. In 1982 the IDF invaded Lebanon to expel it, causing the PLO to relocate to Tunis.

However, most Palestinian residents remained in Lebanon and are now estimated at around 5,00,000, roughly one-tenth of the population. Syria, a neighbouring big brother under the al-Assad regime, also intervened in the civil war, maintaining a so-called "deterrent force" ostensibly to maintain order. Lebanon's relief at the PLO's exit was short-lived.

Revolutionary Iran soon waded in to seed the Hezbollah militia to collectivise and militarise the country's sizable but poorest, Shia population in the southern areas bordering Israel. Over the next few decades, Iran invested billions of dollars into bankrolling Hezbollah, transforming it into Lebanon's most powerful militia, a Shia welfare organisation, and a key pillar of Iran's "Axis of Resistance". Through guerrilla tactics, Hezbollah fighters inflicted steady losses on the IDF, evicting it from the buffer zone in southern Lebanon in 2000.

Subsequently, in 2006, Hezbollah fought off the IDF in a month-long conflict. This "success" prompted the militia's conversion into a regular proto-army with a fortified Israeli border with sizeable missile and drone capabilities. Following the Hamas attack on Israel on October 7, 2023, Hezbollah joined the battle against the IDF.

In the autumn of 2024, Israel leveraged its deep intelligence penetration to devastating effect: decapitating Hezbollah hierarchy, including its long-time leader, Syed Hassan Nasrallah, and several regional commanders. In a dramatic manner, Israel used pagers and walkie-talkies to kill, maim, and demoralise hundreds of Hezbollah fighters. Hezbollah kept a steady barrage of missile and drone attacks, forcing many Israeli citizens to relocate from northern Israel.

However, by the time of the ceasefire in late October 2024, Hezbollah had been reduced to a pale shadow of its former self. The fall of the al-Assad regime in Syria, which acted as a land bridge with Iran, was a serious setback. Although Hezbollah conspicuously stayed out of Iran's 12-day war with Israel and the United States in June 2025, the degradation of Iranian defence capabilities impacted it.
