Category: Editorial
Title: Lessons from the Haier deal Part One

Lessons from the Haier deal

Bharti-Warburg Pincus consortium's 49% stake buy in Haier India raises questions over our manufacturing ambitions A week after the US Tiktok deal was signed, Haier, a Chinese household appliance major, announced a deal in India. The Bharti-Warburg Pincus consortium acquired 49 per cent of Haier India, with a 2 per cent stake being reserved for Indian management. This leaves Haier with a minority stake of 49 per cent in its Indian subsidiary that houses two manufacturing plants in India.

The subsidiary is valued at $1.5 billion with a growing market share in the household appliances segment comprising freezers, refrigerators, washing machines and air conditioners. Details such as Haier's income from sale of shares, funds being infused by new shareholders and the extent of control Haier retains remain unknown. Despite differences, both deals represent global continuity in certain aspects of deal making involving Chinese firms.

First, the trend of surrendering Chinese control in exchange for market access is gaining acceptance. Second is the role of private equity as a geopolitical buffer. Third, there is convergence among democratic countries in the stance that, owing to attributes of China's political system and dominant position in the manufacturing sector, benefits of equal treatment afforded by the multilateral trade and investment frameworks can be withheld to Chinese firms on the grounds of national security or self-reliance.

Simply put, we can expect more instances of Trump-style bargains that face Chinese companies with overseas ambitions. These trends come at a time when space for domestic policy making to sustain economic growth is shrinking for China. The IMF has warned China that a transition towards consumption-led growth is essential to reduce dependency on its export growth model.

Excess manufacturing capacity caused due to excessive investment in technology is also a drag. Against this context, a forced expansion of China's manufacturing footprint abroad will make domestic policy making more difficult. From a bilateral perspective, the Haier deal illustrates ambition of Chinese companies to tap potential of the Indian market despite geopolitical and regulatory challenges.

It will help stabilise India-China economic ties which have been on the mend since Prime Minister Modi and President Xi met in Kazan in October 2024. Approval granted by China's government to this transaction indicates that there is a grudging acknowledgement that India is a significant contributor towards global market share of Chinese players in certain industries. It is an admission from China that developing a manufacturing footprint abroad is essential despite excess industrial capacity at home.

It also provides succour to the discomfort faced by countries with manufacturing ambitions in the face of China's trade surplus of $1 trillion. The questions Yet there is something about this deal that leaves more to be desired on the Indian policy front. Despite the big picture commonalities, there was a sharp contrast in the tactics employed.

The US had to legislate a ban on Tiktok to force the deal. Indian policymakers achieved a similar outcome by withholding bureaucratic approval for Haier's proposed capital infusion under Press Note 3, a Covid-era FDI screening mechanism. This divergence is not insignificant. Both from a rule of law perspective and as an effective strategy to promote national interest.

The Haier deal follows in the wake of similar joint ventures in the automobile and electronics industries. Several prominent business families and private investors are reported to have engaged in protracted negotiations with Haier for more than six months. During this period, Haier's FDI application was kept in abeyance starving an expanding business of capital and potentially risking manufacturing jobs.
