Category: Editorial
Title: Lost in the glow navigating the crisis of Part Two

Lost in the glow: navigating the crisis of light and wildlife

While some species such as elephants become light-habituated, others such as leopards avoid brightly lit areas and shift to darker routes through villages or agricultural lands, increasing the risk of human-wildlife conflict. Repeated exposure to light can reduce an animal's natural aversion to light, causing them to associate light with high-energy food sources. Habituated elephants, for instance, may be attracted to night glows/halos originating from distant towns and cultivated fields, increasing the likelihood of negative interactions with people.

High-beam headlights from vehicles can also startle animals, escalating stress and conflict. Such incidents are routinely observed on roads that pass through our forests. Growing light pollution is likely contributing to human-wildlife negative interactions in landscapes such as Wayanad. Light pollution policy For a sustainable transition to a "low glow" Kerala, a comprehensive state policy on light pollution is essential, as no regulations currently mandates correlated colour temperature (CCT) limits based on ecological sensitivity.

Regulations supported by a mix of mandates and incentives, can bring about systematic reduction in CCTs, and promote the use of full-cut-off, shielded, and low-intensity lighting for outdoor applications, including streetlights and public illumination. Establishing ecological lighting standards (ELS) by zone-based limits and prescribing appropriate spectral quality standards (in CCTs) based on ecological sensitivity offer a practical way to address this issue, from protected areas to urban centres. In general, regulations requiring downward-facing, low-kelvin LED lights, and light curfews, particularly on commercial advertisements, can significantly reduce sky glow and glare.

Additionally, innovations such as adaptive dimming, midnight intensity reduction, and motion-triggered lighting systems using passive infrared or advanced microwave sensors, while reducing power consumption, also improve the quality of ecosystems around them. Regular monitoring using light meters and Sky Quality Meters, remote sensing, ecological surveys, and citizen science initiatives is essential to track progress and compliance. Critical ecological zones, from protected areas to high-value biodiversity areas, must shift to deep amber (1,800 K), amber (2,200 K) lights and reduce unnecessary illuminations.

In surrounding interface zones, warm lighting (up to 2,700 K) is recommended. Across the rest of the state, wherever possible, lighting should be limited up to 3,000 K or warmer, favouring dim, low-intensity white light to reduce ecological impact. Establishing dark corridors can help reconnect fragmented forests by reducing lighting durations, dimming or switching them off after midnight, thereby facilitating the movement of wildlife, from elephants to tiny moths.

A single brightly lit road cutting through a traditional migratory path can cause fragmentation. Without the corridors, these patches become biological prisons, leading to inbreeding and local extinction. Creating dark zones around high-value biodiversity areas can prevent sky glow that otherwise spills into the night and acts like welcome sign for habituated wildlife.

By doing so, they can preserve true darkness as an asset, supporting conservation while attracting niche, high-value tourism. At the same time, targeted incentives for individuals, LSGDs and government agencies that comply with these standards can accelerate its adoption and acceptance. Introducing these measures also reduce the likelihood of light-induced behavioural changes in wildlife that contribute to human-wildlife conflict.

It is time to recognise ALAN as a legally defined form of disturbance in the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986, and mandate light impact assessment for all development activities in and around key ecological zones as well as high value biodiversity areas. Reclaim the night Individual habits, culture and preferences are driving this problem. People celebrate with light, often turning night into day and illuminating the surroundings with artificial brightness, from buildings to towering trees.
