Category: Editorial
Title: Lost in the glow navigating the crisis of Part One

Lost in the glow: navigating the crisis of light and wildlife

The crisis of light and wildlife It is time to recognise artificial lighting at night as a legally defined form of disturbance in the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986, and mandate light impact assessment for all development activities in and around key ecological zones as well as high-value biodiversity areas For most of human history, sunset was the hard boundary after a day of activity. The night was not at all a void; it was a velvet curtain that signalled the body to rest and the nocturnal world to wake up. Today, that boundary has blurred.

From glaring intense white streetlights and headlights to the persistent blue glow of handheld devices, people are living in a permanent artificial noon. So the quest to banish the shadows have inadvertently led to an environmental crisis  -  light pollution. Light pollution is an ecological pollutant caused by the inappropriate use of artificial light outdoors.

In the past 20 years, the use of LEDs exploded, as it became so cheap and energy-efficient. Since 2010, earth's lit surface has been increasing in both intensity and extent by approximately 2-6% per year. Dark skies over the forests of the Western Ghats are rapidly disappearing as unnecessary high-intensity lighting spreads near forests.

Physiological toll Life on Earth evolved over millions of years under stable day-night and seasonal cycles. So any sudden disruptions to this rhythms is catastrophic. Human eyes regulate sleep through cells that are highly sensitive to blue light. Many common white lights (4,000-6,500 kelvin), emit strong blue wavelengths, mimicking daylight, leading to reduced night vision acuity, suppressed melatonin and disrupted sleep.

Similar negative effects are observed in animals as well. The eyes of many animals, especially nocturnal animals, are most sensitive to blue and ultraviolet light, which at high energy can damage photoreceptor cells. Slightest levels of illumination can alter behaviours, affecting waking cycle, foraging and food intake, and disrupts reproduction.

Impact on wildlife The night time is a critical ecological niche necessary for the survival of a majority of living organisms. Artificial light at night (ALAN) disrupts wildlife across taxa by altering behaviour, physiology, movement, and reproduction. Migrating birds become disoriented by city lights, leading to fatal collisions and exhaustion in photic trap events.

Sea turtle hatchlings, guided by the brightest horizon, are misled by ALAN and move away from the ocean, while adult females avoid nesting on illuminated beaches. Insects are drawn to lights in large numbers, causing mass mortality, disrupting pollination and collapsing ecological balance, with cascading effects on predators; fireflies fail to communicate and reproduce; and moth-mediated pollination declines. Light also alters circadian rhythms, extending activity in diurnal species and even affecting neural physiology.

Amphibians reduce or stop calling and mating under slightest artificial illumination, impairing their behaviour and reproduction. Light-adapted predators, like leopards or bats or spotted owlets, gain an advantage, while dark-dependent species decline. Even very low light levels can delay activity and reduce foraging in nocturnal mammals and forest-floor species.

Artificial light disrupts aquatic life by altering vertical migration of zooplankton, triggering trophic cascades, causing algal blooms, reduced oxygen, and degraded water quality. It also affects soil, altering microbial communities, reducing nutrient cycling, and destabilising food webs. Glow trap Illuminated linear infrastructure such as roads acts as a psychological barriers for many mammals.
