Category: Editorial
Title: Making socialism great again Part Two

Making socialism great again?

Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, for example, questioned, "If socialism is government owning the means of production, wouldn't the government owning part of Intel be a step toward socialism?" So, the confusion continues. Trump certainly did more than just impose a tariff when he demanded AMD and Nvidia pay a 15% export tax on chips sold to China. He, thus, established a system where the government controls which companies can sell to which clients and at what price.

However, his administration claimed that its drug policy is in line with free-market principles - Washington will not set pricing, but it will demand that Medicaid prices be comparable to those in other advanced economies. Even the hitherto sacrosanct H-1B visa programme for foreign experts, which even conservative restrictionists feel is beneficial to the US, has not been spared by Trump. In fact, even in his first term, Trump promoted a full-scale economic nationalist programme, which was often viewed as Marxism-Trumpism or socialism by experts.

Early in 2000, when the pandemic threatened the world economy with a recession, the Trump administration planned the Covid-19 stimulus plan to provide $1,000 in cash per person. Additionally, a number of US bailout programmes known as "Trump administration farmer bailouts" were implemented during Trump's first term in office as part of his "America First" economic strategy to assist US farmers who were suffering as a result of the US-China trade war as well as trade disputes with the European Union and some other countries. Now, Trump 2.0 compared the US economy to a supermarket where he has the final say over prices, as many of his policies favour central authority over market incentives.

"We are a department store, and we set the price," Trump said to Time magazine. "I meet with the companies, and then I set a fair price… and they can pay it, or they don't have to pay it," said Trump. It's likely that Trump is more interested in politics than ideology. He must be thinking that instead of giving money to big companies for free, the state should be getting the most out of the deal.

However, as a result of these stock purchases, America is gradually moving towards an economy where the government is a player on the field rather than a referee. So, the question that would keep haunting experts is whether Trump is merely an asymptomatic carrier of socialism. Or perhaps Trumpism-Socialism, a brand-new kind of "ism", is created in the process.

By Atanu Biswas Professor of Statistics, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
