Category: Editorial
Title: Monetary policy Responding to the times Part Two

Monetary policy: Responding to the times

A domestic liquidity squeeze often accompanied past FX outflows, therefore markets fear it. But now, despite large outflows, durable liquidity remains in surplus. Third, buying dollars forward does not reduce reserves immediately and may not even in the future. The forward book can be rolled over if needed.

In NDF contracts only the net loss has to be paid. The cost maybe higher if the rupee is depreciating at that time. But so far the RBI has made large profits on its FX interventions. Therefore, the claim that the forward book has to be deducted in order to see what reserves really are is not entirely true.

Derivatives are a more modern and economical way of intervening to reduce unwarranted risk perceptions. Their share in intervention has risen since 2013. Fourth, the debate often worries about large new peaks in absolute numbers. A short forward book of above $100 billion! But, because the size of relevant markets is growing, ratios are not materially larger.

Intervention as a ratio of FX turnover this year is less than it was in 2014 or 2021. Forward book A similar build-up of the forward book occurred during earlier global shocks, but was unwound or rolled over without problem. Already inflows under the FCNR(B) scheme have been used partly to close short NDF contracts maturing over the next three months.

Returning inflows will be more than enough to unwind the forward book, to build up reserves and for the rupee to appreciate -  because more than surplus dollars, appreciation just needs sentiment to change. EMs tend to have self-fulfilling cycles of depreciation; advanced economy currency overshoots and then reverses. Since inflation and risk are lower today in India, we could see nominal appreciation once sentiment improves.

Past global shocks were temporary and outflows always reversed. This period of volatility has, however, persisted since the end of 2024, longer than usual. The US tariffs were negative for India; FPI began chasing AI investments. War related oil shocks and other supply disruptions followed. Global current account imbalances have increased to Covid-19 levels.

The US deficit exceeds the large combined China and Euro Zone surplus. China's surplus has increased to $300 billion. Compared to many countries India's deficit is tiny. Yet it has been punished inordinately by outflows. The lesson for the long term is to move to a surplus, with independence from any one kind of inflow for financing.

There are many initiatives for this. As India's shock resilience and outperformance, including lower sensitivity to higher oil prices, become clearer, outflows should reverse. Advantages of natural and policy supported diversity are text-book plays to counter shocks. Moreover, some of the shocks themselves are dissipating.

The present 10 per cent US tariff on India is actually less than on its competitors and exports have anyway continued to do well. The AI play has begun to be questioned and Indian stock markets are set for a diversification payoff. The main benefit of AI is going to come from applications from which India is poised to benefit as it develops small language models using customisable open weight AI.

The world is going through unprecedented crises. The Indian policy response has sustained growth; monetary policy also is demonstrating that a good pilot can reach harbour even in stormy seas. For this it has to keep a steady course and also communicate ability and intent to nervous markets. US bond market yields rose, although a hold was widely expected, because the Fed Chair did not communicate inflation fighting intent alongside.
