Category: Editorial
Title: Monetary policy Responding to the times Part One

Monetary policy: Responding to the times

A data-based pause and continuation of neutral stance is ideal, while waiting for current uncertainty to resolve There is an impressive consensus among economists and analysts for the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to give a pause in repo rates. Normally, in an emerging market (EM) under pressure from global volatility, with headline inflation crossing the inflation target, there should be calls to raise rates! Putting core forecasts in the public domain may have helped moderate analysts' inflation expectations.

June headline inflation came in at 4.4 per cent but core core inflation was only 2.5 per cent, implying there is no sign of generalised excess demand. It is increasingly recognised that volatile components revert to a more stable trend. Firms' pass-through of commodity price spikes has also fallen in the inflation targeting regime and can be expected to be muted to the extent consumer confidence and spending fall in difficult times.

There is more of an understanding of inflation targeting and that temporary spikes can be looked through, with the tolerance band giving the space to accommodate such spikes. While the monsoon has picked up in the key planting month of July the Middle East tensions continue. But countries and the oil market are finding substitution possibilities as well as ways to keep oil flowing.

Crude oil futures are in the early eighties while the MPC had taken the value of 95. There may even be room to reduce headline inflation forecasts. However, if inflation rises persistently, the MPC will act to ensure inflation expectations remain anchored. How much pass-through there is and how persistent the commodity shocks are, remains to be seen.

Growth has held up well despite global shocks, but there is some softening and it is below potential. Moreover, aspirational youth are restless for progress. Signs of a broad-based revival in the private sector investment cycle also need support. Using policy to counter global shocks is essential for this.

A data-based pause and continuation of the neutral stance is best, while waiting for current high levels of uncertainty to resolve. Financial conditions The measures in the last policy are enabling banks to raise interest rates for NRIs and help solve the mismatch in deposit and credit growth without a general rise in interest rates. The rupee has more support, which is the dominant factor to attract fixed income flows.

As a result G-sec yields are also softening, which will help the interrupted transmission of lower repo rates. Interest differential with the US has come down from around 5 per cent in end-2023 to around 2 per cent but is adequate as risk and inflation have fallen in India, but risen in the US. Spreads still exceed the average EM spread of 2 per cent.

Both the rupee and G-sec yields have suffered from adverse sentiments more than from real weakness  -  so demonstration of levers to attract multiple types of inflows is a confidence builder, even as the repo rate remains focused on the domestic cycle. Nervousness regarding RBI's large forward book is unwarranted. Intervention using forwards, with a rising share of non-deliverable forwards (NDFs), has many rationales.

First, since causality runs from the NDF market to domestic markets during global volatility, such intervention is more effective. Second, NDF intervention does not drain domestic liquidity unlike dollar sales in the spot market or settlement of domestic forwards. It helps insulate domestic liquidity from forex (FX) intervention.
