Category: Editorial
Title: Nationwide gig workers strike sends a strong Part Three

Nationwide gig workers' strike sends a strong message to platform capitalists

This equalisation of the cosmetic with the clinical has undone the entire concept of body positivity and acceptance. While body positivity can in no way be used to justify obesity, it does lead to self-acceptance rather than self-abhorrence and helps to demolish stigmas. Defining the body in terms of clinical constructs like BMI may inadvertently reinforce thinness as the only acceptable self-image tool and toss all larger body types to the "unhealthy" basket, who feel extreme pressure to conform, not because they organically want to but because society just thrust a judgmental milestone at them.

This has already percolated to the daily economy. Plus-size sections at brand outlets are disappearing fast with a polite suggestion to go online for bigger sizes. But the price of the drug is the biggest demotivator, with midlifers in the US giving up the medication midway because of the cost burden.

Besides, let's not forget the dark side: The suits against manufacturers about insufficient warning labels about the severe side effects  -  gastrointestinal issues, muscle wasting and vision problems. A public interest litigation (PIL) in the Delhi High Court has raised concerns about the licences for certain weight-loss drug combinations without India-specific trials, overlooking regional health and genetic factors. The use of weight-loss drugs, whose benefits outweigh the risks in those who are on the edge, has unfortunately also created a new sense of inadequacy.

Some users report mood changes, increased anxiety, or anhedonia (loss of pleasure in previously enjoyed activities), which can be related to the brain's adjustment to a lower calorie intake or changes in the dopamine reward system. For sedentary Indians, who have a thin-fat problem, meaning they may not be overweight but have belly fat, the use of the drug might lead to severe muscle wasting, which tends to be replaced by more fat. Traditionally, fitness implied strength and overall well-being achieved through physical activity.

The use of weight-loss drugs primarily targets fat mass, which may or may not directly correlate with overall physical fitness and functional health. Yet the obsession with drugs seems to take away the human agency we all have. By Rinku Ghosh The writer is senior associate editor, The Indian Express.
