Category: Editorial
Title: Nationwide gig workers strike sends a strong Part Two

Nationwide gig workers' strike sends a strong message to platform capitalists

It is heartening to note that the unions' call for a strike is being widely supported by customers, as evident from the proliferation of WhatsApp statuses and social media messages. So, even though it may take more time to achieve long-term goals such as fair wages and payment transparency, this strike has surely helped raise awareness among the general public about the need to look critically at the Insta-delivery system from a worker-oriented perspective. Written by Babu P Remesh The writer is professor and dean, School of Development Studies, Dr.

B.R. Ambedkar University Delhi. Views are personal The year of weight-loss drugs: When health became about thinness, not fitness, again The use of weight-loss drugs primarily targets fat mass, which may or may not directly correlate with overall physical fitness and functional health. Yet the obsession with drugs seems to take away the human agency we all have For the past couple of years, weight-loss drugs have been an elite privilege, creating a class system within those battling obesity and diabetes and setting new aspirational benchmarks of what a healthy life should look like.

This year, their manufacturers lowered their prices, tapping into a booming diabetes and obesity market in India. Given that the trials of their cascading benefits  -  being protective of the heart and kidneys  -  were largely industry sponsored, has the medicalisation of obesity hijacked our understanding of body image? For starters, a once-a-week jab is seen as a saviour drug that belittles any human effort at weight loss and even makes it unnecessary among those averse to a gym routine.

Despite repeated clarifications that the efficacy of the drug is co-dependent on diet, lifestyle corrections, fitness routines, and most importantly baseline fitness and health, it has emerged as the heavenly manna that can melt fat without heaving off the couch, completely disempowering an individual and bartering away their will to take physical charge of their lives. The obvious fallout has been the Benjamin Buttonish experiments of techpreneur Bryan Johnson, who has built an empire around body obsession, even finding ways of tackling the side effects of drugs, muscle wasting and a droopy face. Be it gene therapy for building muscle mass or the Baby Face shot of a donor-derived fat to restore facial volume, weight loss drugs are laying the foundation of Johnson's belief that the body is God, giving it agency over the human mind.

Societally, weight-loss drugs "healthified" thinness instead of fitness. Celebrities at red-carpet events wore more translucent dresses in 2025, showing off their age-defying thin bodies. It didn't matter that their face drooped due to loss of face fat, had deeper wrinkles and that they looked visibly older.

Or that the appetite-killing drugs had robbed them of sensory joys. None other than tennis ace Serena Williams was coerced by the "thin and fit" grammar as she promoted a weight-loss injectable as a brand ambassador of a healthcare company. She may have made an informed choice for her health, but she simultaneously propagated the myth that even an athletic and a robustly built person like her needed a jab to feel better about herself.
