Category: Editorial
Title: Navigating agentic AI in insurance Part Two

Navigating agentic AI in insurance

Singapore stands out as the most forward-thinking jurisdiction on agentic AI. Its Infocomm Media Development Authority released the world's first model AI governance framework specifically addressing agentic AI in January. It introduces several genuinely novel concepts: Agent identity cards  -  a standardised disclosure format specifying capabilities, limitations, authorised action domains, and escalation protocols; a five-tier graded autonomy taxonomy.

So for insurance, Singapore's Monetary Authority has been encouraging insurers to develop coverage products that map to this autonomy taxonomy. Compared to these advanced jurisdictions, India is approximately where the EU was in 2022. The regulatory intent is present, the direction is right, but the framework for AI  -  specifically agentic AI liability and insurance coverage  - have not yet been built.

The infrastructure and governance foundation on which agentic AI-specific requirement can eventually be built are now available. Against this backdrop, Indian businesses seeking insurance cover for mitigation of the risk remains open and tied up to the policy contracts between them and insurers. Pricing for the agentic AI liability risk is evolving and could be very subjective, and have serious implications when losses are claimed by businesses.

Evidencing controls, particularly in agentic AI, is fundamentally hard. This is because the attack surface is dynamic and non-deterministic. An AI agent is constantly making decisions, calling tools, querying databases, writing data, and interacting with external APIs  -  often simultaneously across systems.

Then again, the responsibility to test controls regularly is distributed across multiple principals, and as is often seen, controls may exist on paper but not active during the incident. There is a way in which businesses can evidence controls, particularly when losses have to be claimed. Most progressive insurers in India have a panel of experts, who have a deep understanding of the malicious attacks and threat actors behind it.

They also offer assistance to policyholders to mitigate or minimise the losses. This service therefore is a win-win for both the business and insurer to contain risk or loss. There is a particular benefit for the business policyholder to engage with one of these panel experts when incidents happen. The expert can evidence the controls and their root-cause analysis will assist corporates in claiming the loss amount from the insurer.

There is however one flaw in this arrangement. A close look reveals that at least some of the experts of all the major insurers have the skills and expertise to assist the company in AI risk mitigation. For agentic AI deployment, they have inadequate skills and experience. Agentic AI deployment is an underdeveloped subject in India and will evolve.

We are known for our entrepreneurship and ability to adapt and leapfrog. With assistance from policymakers in designing statutes and regulators in providing right guidelines, India will hopefully emerge as a major AI developer and user. Written by Ashvin Parekh The author is the Managing Partner, Ashvin Parekh Advisory Services LLP
