Category: Editorial
Title: On curbing young adults on social media Part Two

On curbing young adults on social media

Limiting access and regulating platforms involve different registers of monitoring and enforcement. In the case of a ban or caps on social media use by under-16s, two levels of enforcement can be visualised. The first is at the individual and household level; here, enforcing a ban, if feasible at all, would lead to intrusive forms of monitoring by platforms.

The second will be at the platform level; a ban or screen time caps would demand age-verification and safeguards to privacy by platforms be rigorously enforced by the government. Holding platforms accountable The alternative is to legally oblige platforms to be transparent on their design, and provisions on safe spaces. Here, governments are likely to face structural and operational barriers.

Governments that rely on social media giants to promote or protect their own interests are unlikely to push platforms to create transparent and accountable mechanisms. Furthermore, ensuring compliance on matters of design would make governments vulnerable to allegations of selective enforcement. Evidently, the policy option of curtailing access is easier than that of making platforms accountable.

Governments find it socially acceptable and legislatively convenient to make a case for age-gating. Devising effective and fair protocols that hold platforms accountable for their unwillingness to design safe spaces is far more complex. Those advocating to curtail access should be cognisant of three matters.

Foremost, they ought to evidentially make their case against social media platforms. Second, they should realise that bans or capping screen-time is nowhere close to a well-rounded regulatory strategy to tackle online safety. Finally, they must anticipate the burden on regulatory and judicial bodies that bans and their enforcement could lead to, and the perils to privacy that come with age-verification.

Vibodh Parthasarathi is with the Centre for Culture, Media and Governance, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
