Category: Editorial
Title: On the Macroeconomics of the legal Part One

On the Macroeconomics of the legal redefinition of labour processes

The Supreme Court's ruling on definition of industry, reducing its scope, can suppress wages, demand and investment The Supreme Court has narrowed the meaning of "industry" under Section 2(p) of the Industrial Relations Code 2020, moving away from the broad definition set earlier by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board case. The fact that the Supreme Court has omitted sovereign, charitable, social and philanthropic activities from its official definition of industry means that there are fewer types of institutional arrangements in which workers can negotiate collectively, resist dismissal or claim higher wages in response to increases in labour productivity. Employers are likely to be led into reorganising their activities using legal forms which are not included in the industrial classification.

This will cause a larger gap between formal and informal employment. As it is, only 23.6 per cent of workers in India are regular salaried employees and just 11 per cent have both salaried status (according to Periodic Labour Force Survey data) and a written contract along with social security; the rest are either self-employed with low incomes or work on a casual daily-wages basis. The pressure on wage incomes (even though this is due to internal differentiation) has the effect of reducing mass purchasing power in the sectors which might otherwise have supported a broader process of industrialisation.

Falling labour share This legal change will, over time, speed up the transfer of income from labour to capital. Data from the most recent Periodic Labour Force Survey indicate that this process is already at work in practice: average monthly earnings in rural areas fell from around ₹9,107 in 2017-18 to about ₹8,842 in 2023-24, and real wages for both rural men and women were lower in 2023-24 than they had been six years before. Although urban wages increased slightly over the same period, this increase was offset by inflation.

Since people spend less overall when wages fall, this will reduce total consumption in the economy. Lower consumption then drags down demand, factory/business capacity use, and investment creating a negative economic cycle. This problem gets worse because spending from wages (by workers) relies more on locally made goods, while spending from profits (by businesses/investors) tends to involve more imported goods.

So as wages shrink and profits' share grows, the economy leans more on imports, further weakening the domestic effects described above. The Supreme Court's decision is likely to contribute to a negative trend which is already apparent in the data, of a fall in labour share of national income over the last four decades (ILO). The idea frequently advanced is that less strict labour protection, something which the Supreme Court itself embodies, will greatly shift global production networks towards India, although labour arbitrage is in reality mostly at odds with the key cost-determining factors in modern manufacturing.

Labour arbitrage myth The present centres of these global production networks, which are located in East and South-East Asia, enjoy the benefits of economies of scale resulting from the concentration of suppliers and the sharing of fixed costs associated with design, tooling and logistics. While India's manufacturing-to-GDP ratio has stayed between 16 and 17 per cent for over 10 years, Vietnam's is about 25 per cent and China's is around 28 per cent. An enterprise joining the Indian manufacturing sector would have to start by operating on a relatively small scale, so its average fixed costs would be high regardless of the level of its wage rate.
