Category: Editorial
Title: On the Macroeconomics of the legal Part Two

On the Macroeconomics of the legal redefinition of labour processes

In East and South-East Asia, economies of scale work hand in hand with economies of scope. Companies which have set up their production platforms possess a variety of complementary capabilities, such as the supply of precision components, testing laboratories, packaging design, trade finance, repair and maintenance, and engineering consultancies, most of which are developed together. As a result, the average cost of launching new products is lower when these advantages are offered together than it would be if an Indian firm did not have access to such economies of scale and scope.

The legal limitation on industrial status is probably not going to have any positive effect on the establishment of the types of relational contracting and skill development needed for economies of scope; on the contrary, it may even discourage long-term investment in those capabilities, since macroeconomic demand would become more volatile when wages are unstable. It is very improbable that multinational companies will carry out partial relocations merely on the grounds of labour arbitrage, even if the benefits from economies of scale and scope had been less important. Such companies generally require a certain minimum level of infrastructure, including a reliable supply of electricity, efficient port turnarounds, sufficient road and rail links, and the digitalisation of customs procedures, among other things.

India's well-recognised but relatively low level of achievement in these areas results in higher working capital needs and also causes risk premiums to be added to production in India. A government survey covering the period 2021-22 put logistics costs at 7.8-8.9 per cent of GDP; a subsequent study by NCAER-DPIIT raised the figure for the fiscal year 2024 to 7.97 per cent of GDP, while industry analyses have set it at a higher level of 13-14 per cent of GDP, as compared with an international average which is near 8 per cent. Whatever estimate is more accurate, a comparison between India and Vietnam is helpful.

One analysis indicates that India's logistics costs are 4-5 percentage points above those of Vietnam, which are 8-9 per cent of GDP. This difference alone is enough to cancel out India's apparent advantage in labour costs for export manufacturing, even if one ignores Vietnam's higher level of labour productivity. Since wage expenses normally make up only a small part of the final price of tradable goods, even large cuts in wages may not be sufficient to offset the disadvantages faced by India in terms of its infrastructure.

When it comes to labour arbitrage and with all the above factors being the same among different countries, the criterion that determines where global production networks should be set up is the ratio of real wages to labour productivity. In India the benefit of low wages is offset by low labour productivity since Indian firms do not place a strong emphasis on on-the-job training; this is because the overall macroeconomic demand conditions do not make long-term commitments to workers worthwhile. The comparative trade data compiled by the World Bank make this effect evident, even though the different data compilers arrive at different interpretations.
