Category: Editorial
Title: Paying Musk irrational exuberance and Part Two

Paying Musk, irrational exuberance and inequality

But this is to take too narrow a view of the political import of inequality. The process of voting at Tesla may be legitimate, given the narrow bounds of procedure laid down by the company, but is unjustifiable given the fact that Elon Musk has interfered in elections, publicly made a gesture that has been interpreted as a Nazi salute and amplified hateful right-wing content on a social media platform that he owns. The procedural form of voting is necessary, but not sufficient, for the preservation of economic democracy.

A simple account of democracy, for instance, would hold that organs of free speech should not be monopolised. Yet this is exactly what X's (Twitter) shareholders voted to do when they agreed to its sale. Imagine that all workers of Tesla can vote on executive compensation, but not on conditions of work.

Further, imagine that Musk provides a credible plan to increase stock values, and along with it comes a significant increase in his own net wealth. Voting for the plan increases workers' net wealth, but increases the possibilities of further election interference. By the narrow bounds of economic rationality, it would be rational for individuals to vote for the plan.

For shareholder capitalism to truly uphold democratic norms, voters would have to be economically irrational in prizing political objectives over their narrow economic interests. The effect of wealth rise One might criticise this argument by claiming that this writer is unfairly conflating political and economic objectives, which shareholder capitalism was never meant to tackle. But the unchecked wealth accumulation of the last couple of decades has meant a blurring of the boundaries separating the political from the economic.

Rising wealth inequality, even if accompanied by rising individual wealth, has brought with it a weakening of political institutions. X's sale and Tesla's pay package have shown that simple access to equity shares and the act of voting alone cannot meaningfully halt modern capitalism's worst excesses. What is required is to embed these processes in broader democratic institutions that explicitly limit the concentration of wealth and its ability to interfere in democratic processes.

Keynes realised this contradiction: capitalism can only meaningfully work if its operation is curtailed. It is beyond time we recognise it as well. Rahul Menon teaches at the Jindal School of Government and Public Policy at O.P. Jindal Global University
