Category: Editorial
Title: Political demography the future of democracy Part One

Political demography, the future of democracy

Politics must move from profiting from demographic change to sensitively managing and navigating its consequences What is common between Elon Musk, M.K. Stalin, a Catholic bishop in Keralam, N. Chandrababu Naidu, C. Joseph Vijay and Mohan Bhagwat? All of them are asking 'their' people to have more children.

The political consequences of changing patterns of birth, death and the movement of people are being felt the world over. The ongoing Census 2027 operations in India have brought a sense of urgency to this question of uneven population trends across regions and communities. The impending question of delimitation of Lok Sabha constituencies, which is to follow the first Census after 2026, adds another layer of urgency.

Natalism, or pronatalism, is a belief system or policy stance that encourages human reproduction and high birth rates, and there are vocal advocates of this these days in communities around the world. Elections and political debates increasingly involve questions of fertility, migration, ageing, identity and belonging. Mr.

Musk speaks of falling birth rates as a major threat to civilisation, particularly western. In India, Mr. Naidu, president of the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) and Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, has urged Telugu families to have more children. Mr. Stalin, president of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and former Tamil Nadu Chief Minister, invoked the idea of having "16 children", rhetorically, for Tamils.

Mr. Bhagwat, Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) chief, has explicitly called for Indian, rather Hindu, families to have three children. The Catholic church asks its members to have bigger families. In the most recent development, the Tamil Nadu government, led by Mr. Vijay, Chief Minister and founder and president of the Tamilaga Vettri Kazhagam (TVK), has extended one-year maternity leave to women government employees having a third child in Tamil Nadu.

In 2024, West Bengal and Trinamool Congress (TMC) Minister Firhad Hakim's remark that Muslims could soon become a majority in the State drew criticism, with the TMC distancing itself from the comment and condemning it. Take the subject seriously All this makes political demography  -  the study of how population changes, such as births, deaths, ageing, and migration, affect government policies, political power, and international security  -  more salient. Sadly, while there is abundant politics around demography, true scholarship is being stifled by conspiracy theorists seeking political capital and by demographic sceptics who view any discussion of the subject as nativism or xenophobia.

While the global population will continue to grow for some time, that growth is uneven across political boundaries and social groups. India itself is moving rapidly through a fertility transition. India's total fertility rate has fallen below replacement level, to 2.0 children per woman according to the National Family Health Survey (NFHS)-5.

Fertility has declined across every major religious community; though the pace of decline has been uneven across regions and communities, the gap is narrowing. Pew Research, using NFHS data, found that Muslim fertility declined from 4.4 children per woman in 1992 to 2.4 in 2019-21, fertility declined among every major religious group and fertility gaps between religious communities have narrowed. Demographic factors will challenge the existing electoral process.

The 'One person, one vote, one value' principle in India is not applied blindly, but in consonance with group rights of representation. Social federalism and political federalism are both part of India's democratic design. Rich and poor people both move, though for different reasons. In recent years, around two lakh Indians have been giving up their Indian citizenship on average, each year.
