Category: Editorial
Title: Political demography the future of democracy Part Two

Political demography, the future of democracy

The poor also move  -  from places with fewer opportunities to places with greater opportunities. According to the 2011 Census, India had about 45 crore internal migrants. Some regions are ageing, while others will remain younger for longer. Keralam has the highest median age in India, estimated at 37 years in 2026, and this is projected to reach 47 years by 2051.

The median age in Uttar Pradesh is approximately 26.9 years, making it one of the youngest States in India. India's projected median age is about 29.2 years in 2026. Even by 2036, the median age of Uttar Pradesh is projected to reach only 31.7 years, according to some estimates. What is in focus Natalism is simplistic rhetoric in response to complex realities.

No country or society has easily or consistently reversed a sustained decline in fertility. Countries such as Japan, South Korea, China, and Italy have introduced financial incentives, childcare support, parental leave, and other pronatalist measures, but none has succeeded in restoring fertility to the levels seen in earlier decades. South Korea, despite extensive family policies, continues to have extraordinarily low fertility.

Italy, too, has continued to experience declining births despite financial incentives and family-support measures. This suggests that fertility is not simply a question of money. It is tied to housing, employment, education, gender relations, the cost of raising children, and people's expectations about the future.

The reason for continued population growth in many societies is increasingly expanding lifespan and population momentum rather than increasing births. The spread of that growth is uneven across political boundaries and social groups. Similarly, wealth creation and distribution remain uneven and will remain so.

Fewer people are being born, people are living longer, moving faster and farther; these factors in combination with demands of democracy and federalism raise challenges that require cool thinking and new imaginative capacity. Studying the interlinkage between politics and demography is a marginal field within political science and demography, but it should not remain so. In many countries, such as the United States and India, the question of federalism is also in play alongside demography and the economy.

A balance will have to be achieved both across social groups nationally and across States in terms of development outcomes, growth, opportunities, and political power. India's southern States, for instance, achieved fertility decline earlier and now face the possibility of ageing faster than States with relatively younger populations. The political question is not simply who has more people, but who has invested in development, who has fewer young people entering the workforce, who needs resources, and how representation should respond to these differences.

In a utopian world, if all of humanity were one, no consideration other than individual identity should come into play. But these questions are, for better or worse, framed in terms of group identities. Recognition of group identities is not alien to democratic practice; it can be an integral and essential part of it.

The political problem, therefore, is not that groups exist. It is how democratic institutions and development planning can accommodate changing group identities without turning demographic differences into permanent political antagonism. Impact on planning and politics The changes in demographic patterns affect both planning and politics.
