Category: Editorial
Title: Preserving heritage beyond forts and palaces Part One

Preserving heritage beyond forts and palaces

It is commonplace to look at heritage in terms of beautiful buildings, palaces, forts and monuments, artifacts or colourful dances and cultural celebrations. t is commonplace to look at heritage in terms of beautiful buildings, palaces, forts and monuments, artifacts or colourful dances and cultural celebrations. This tendency gets emphasised as tourism is more likely to be linked to these aspects of heritage.

Of course, this is important; all things of beauty should be cherished, particularly those with history attached to them. Nevertheless, overemphasis on beauty and glamour should not lead to the neglect of those aspects of heritage that can be helpful in other important ways for present times, even for meeting urgent needs. A view may be taken by some that keeping in view the advancement of technology, we have better means of meeting our various needs and hence these aspects of heritage are not so important or relevant now.

However, this would be too narrow a view in several contexts of the contributions previous generations made in terms of finding local solutions for problems, keeping in view what works best in the more specific local conditions. It would be a costly mistake to ignore these and move ahead arrogantly with development models that fail to look at specific local needs. This is particularly relevant in the context of water conservation, irrigation and agriculture, aspects that have been of critical importance for the survival and well-being of rural communities over hundreds of years, with each generation benefiting from the legacy of previous generations, supplementing these learnings and passing them on.

Such learnings, oral memories and written records, and the structures which embody them are an invaluable part of the heritage of any region or place. Thus, the historic tanks or wells of a region or other structures created by people for conservation of water, domestic use or irrigation present the accumulated collective experience, wisdom and hard work of people and communities over centuries. Even if a period of neglect in certain circumstances may have led to these being in a rather dismal state today, the thoughtful learner may still be able to absorb important lessons for present times.

After all, the collected experiences of generations about the best means for meeting basic needs cannot be ignored. In fact, even when we look at some of the beautiful palaces and forts of historic importance, it adds great value to our understanding of this heritage if we give more attention to how water needs were secured. After all, the armies of kings had to ensure they would not be deprived of water if they faced a formidable attack on the fort.

Thus, they tried to make enough arrangements for water conservation. There can be important learnings from some of these efforts even today. Several palaces and forts like Mahendragarh, Amber, Nahargarh, Chittorgarh and Jal Mahal (Rajasthan), Chitradurg (Karnataka), Mandu (Madhya Pradesh), Janjira (Maharashtra), etc.

are known additionally for their water works. But it would be a mistake to look only at forts and palaces for examples of water wisdom. It was the efforts of people to ensure the sustainability of their communities by ensuring water needs were met that are of the greatest significance and learning. This is important in the context of a region like Bundelkhand where the need for creating water storages has been acute in villages.
