Category: Editorial
Title: Preserving heritage beyond forts and palaces Part Two

Preserving heritage beyond forts and palaces

It has been rightly pointed out that the Chandela and Bundela kings made important contributions to create the vast network of tanks and related water works in Bundelkhand over centuries. While the contribution of the royals must be appreciated, ultimately this heritage of thousands of tanks and many more wells reflect the work and skills of people and communities. In recent times, when under initiatives such as BIWAL (Bundelkhand Initiative for Water, Agriculture and Livelihoods) several voluntary organizations grouped together for renovation of traditional water tanks and wells, people of many villages responded well with their voluntary work and skills.

The result was that useful work could be accomplished in cost-effective ways. While a lot of this work was taken up under corporate social responsibility projects, Niti Ayog also played an important role. No less important is the heritage that is available with farmers and communities for the progress of agriculture, horticulture and animal husbandry.

This heritage is best utilised when practices consistent with this are promoted, for example when natural farming is being popularized or when efforts to collect and save traditional seed varieties are being made. On the other hand, when efforts based on technologies inconsistent with traditional wisdom are implemented or when traditional practices are uprooted by artificial impositions, it becomes more difficult to protect and save heritage. Hence, it is important to have an understanding of protecting heritage in a broader framework, so that much more that is of great value can be protected and the entire heritage protection effort can also be of benefit to people in meeting their contemporary needs and aspirations on the path of sustainable development.

By BHARAT DOGRA (The writer is Honorary Convener, Campaign to Save Earth Now. His recent books include India's Quest for Sustainable Farming and Healthy Food and Man over Machine.)
