Category: Editorial
Title: Prioritising cleft care as a health issue Part One

Prioritising cleft care as a health issue

Comprehensive cleft care for children in India is driven by the non-profit private model while government has achieved little in creating awareness or making cleft surgeries accessible and affordable to all More than 7,50,000 cleft surgeries were performed in India in the last 25 years by the international NGO Smile Train. This amounts to 30,000 surgeries annually. It is the highest by any organisation in the private or public sector.

But the figures don't shine in India where one in 700 children are born with lip and/or palate deformity every year and there is a backlog of 7,000 corrective surgeries annually. Smile Train India is among the NGOs that support and partner with skilled surgeons to provide free cleft surgeries and related care. While its contribution has benefited 7.5 lakh children so far, others, including Mission Smile, Operation Smile, Transforming Cleft and Healing Smile Foundation, have collectively benefited another 15 lakh children in the last 20 years.

Their efforts deserve appreciation. However, they still fall short in India, which, despite recording the highest number of cleft births globally, has no national epidemiological data on cleft lip/palate. Cleft lip/palate is a facial birth defect that occurs when certain tissues and structures do not fuse during pregnancy due to genetic factor or maternal nutrition deficiencies.

It leaves newborns with a gap in the upper lip and the roof of the mouth. Independent surveys estimate that 36,000 babies are born with cleft abnormalities in India every year. About 68% of them rely on government hospitals for initial diagnosis, yet there are 17.5 lakh children with unrepaired clefts.

The situation in India The situation is complex: there is lack of documentation of birth anomalies, and parental counseling on care and treatment is woefully inadequate. Also, the high cost of surgery deters families from seeking help. A decade ago, the Lancet Surgery Commission estimated a burden of 18.7% untreated Orofacial Clefts (OFC) in India.

A 2022 report of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington's School of Medicine, stated that children with OFCs in India were 1.5 times more vulnerable to severe malnutrition compared to other children under five. It also says one-third of the cleft lip and palate-related malnutrition deaths can be prevented with timely surgical treatment and proper nutrition. Free or subsidised surgery and follow-up treatment are provided by NGOs in collaboration with mostly city-based private hospitals because government hospitals lack specialised infrastructure and trained personnel.

The fragmented cleft care offered by government hospitals are not aggregated in public databases, maybe because India is yet to nationally recognise craniofacial anomalies as a notifiable disease. The World Health Organization has formally recognised craniofacial anomaly in the Global Burden of Disease initiative. This is what perhaps led the NITI Aayog to initiate conversations around birth defects.

The National Birth Defect Awareness Month launched in August 2024 on the theme 'Breaking Barriers: inclusive support for children with birth defects including clefts' helped discuss prevention, early identification, and timely management of common congenital malformations. Surgeons play a key role in minimising birth defects. While people think of cleft lip and/or palate as a cosmetic deformity, it impacts a child's ability to speak, swallow, hear, and breathe.

If not surgically corrected, babies with a cleft lip have difficulty nursing and require special feeding techniques. Children with a cleft lip get bullied and struggle with school and with communication. Employment and marriage become challenging. All this leads to psychological trauma and affects confidence.
