Category: Editorial
Title: Prioritising cleft care as a health issue Part Two

Prioritising cleft care as a health issue

Ignorance and superstitions strengthen the stigma surrounding the disfigurement, and treatment is marked by a rural-urban divide. Every health challenge requires collaboration. Smile Train India and others address the gaps in cleft services with a sustainable and scalable global health model. This empowers local doctors as equal partners by providing support in training and covering surgical costs.

As per the 2011 Census, 68.8% of the population in rural areas need to be covered aggressively. Collaborating with the Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram and ASHA for clear communication on early screening of birth defects and deficiencies is a way forward. In the absence of hospital partners in interior areas, timely medical intervention, with incentives that cover travel cost, surgery and hospital stay, and post-operative support including speech therapy, is imperative.

The way forward UNICEF estimates that about 2.5 crore children are born in India annually. The 2022 National Family Health Survey states that 1.35 crore children are born in government hospitals, where cleft care in detected cases can ideally start at birth and life-transforming surgery can be done after three months of birth. It is time for policymakers to recognise cleft deformity as a health issue and opt for better management at the grassroots level, where there is limited awareness and access.

The government can devise a multi-level approach to address under served communities. NGOs are trying to expand the footprint but government hospitals, where almost 50% of India's children are born, need to upgrade. Health experts say cleft missions help strengthen government healthcare systems by improving surgical infrastructure, increasing access to affordable care, training the local workforce, and breaking social taboos.

The success of cleft surgeries is measured by improved functionality, which depends on the age at which the child is brought for treatment. By Soma Basu
