Category: Editorial
Title: Propoor capacity building schemes losing

Pro-poor, capacity building schemes losing sheen

Money spent on several key schemes has been lower than the Budget allocations. This will have implications for growth and welfare India's growth is propelled by private consumption and investment, but government expenditure may have more latitude for spurring the economy. The latter has a lot of bearing on agriculture and the allied sector.

Along with climatic factors, technology and structural issues are major concerns. The money spent on two major Central schemes  -  Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) and its Watershed Development component  -  was 22.86 per cent and 40.12 per cent less than the Budget allocation in 2025-26. Further, the budgeted amount has been reduced by a whopping 20.25 per cent in 2026-27 as compared to 2025-26.

One major reason for low farm productivity is the overuse of urea. The agronomic benchmark for N:P:K is 4:2:1. Shockingly, it has deteriorated from 4:3.2:1 in 2009-10 to 9:4.1:1 in 2023-24. This may have prompted the government to reduce the budgeted urea subsidy by 1.76 per cent for the next financial year (FY).

Interestingly, there has been 6.37 per cent overspending of subsidy during the current FY. This is concerning as there was underspending on programmes (irrigation and watershed) having wider implications for the commons and poor, while subsidy programmes have seen overspending, which have long been criticised as disproportionately benefiting large farmers. Similarly, Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi, an income support programme, has been successfully executed by spending the full budgeted amount.

A 100 per cent Central funding may have benefitted the latter, but these successes do not compensate for irrigation programmes' underperformance. The success of a cash transfer or subsidy programme vis-à-vis public asset generation programme also indicate inefficiency in implementation. Central push If State governments are unable to provide matching grants, then the Centre should allocate more funds and change the funding structure.

Spending less than the budgeted amount also helped the Centre meet its fiscal deficit targets. A 15.81 per cent underspending in Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana  -  National Rural Livelihood Mission (DAY-NRLM), a programme that funds SHG-bank credit linkage and generates livelihood activities, has direct implications in meeting credit needs of the rural poor. The SHE-Marts initiative, declared in the 2026-27 Budget, to promote women-led rural enterprises transitioning from SHGs to entrepreneurs, is laudable, but a more basic programme, DAY-NRLM, seems to be underperforming.

Low demand for credit by the rural poor may also be the reason for this, suggesting demand constraint. A 13.71 per cent underspending has occurred this fiscal in the Prime Minister Employment Generation Programme, launched to support bank-financed subsidy for setting up microenterprises in the non-farm sector. There has also been massive underperformance of the schemes in education and public health, with 15.20 per cent underspending in Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman in FY26.

There is only a marginal increment in Budget 2026-27 for this scheme, which hardly protects against inflation. It is difficult to explain the merit of reducing the budgetary allocation in Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana, which was launched in 2006 to establish new AIIMS and modernise existing Government Medical Colleges, and thus reduce regional imbalance in health services. Social infrastructure is as important as any high-value project.

Underspending in Jal Jeevan Mission (national Rural Drinking Water Mission) was to the tune of 74.63 per cent in the current FY. Swachh Bharat Mission has also an underspending of 16.57 per cent in rural areas and 60 per cent in urban areas in the current FY. There has been a 42.11 per cent underspending in the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, with no increment for the next FY, indicating a reduction in budgetary allocation in real terms.

If States' inability to finance matching grants is a reason for underperformance, then a 46.15 per cent increase in budgetary allocation for the public employment programmes MGNREGA and VB-G RAM G combined is meaningless. This is because States' share has increased from 25 per cent in MGNREGA to 40 per cent in VB-G RAM G, which replaces the MGNREGA. An increase in unemployment would tighten the demand constraint and undermine growth.

If administrative incapability is the reason behind underperformance, then administrative reforms should be conducted in mission mode. If budgetary constraint is the issue, then the Centre should step up revenue collection. In this context, the time is also ripe for introducing a wealth tax for a just and fairer society.

By Indranil De The writer is Professor and Axis Bank Chair, IRMA "Tribhuvan" Sahkari University. Views are personal
