Category: Editorial
Title: Reading between Chinas red lines Part Two

Reading between China's red lines

For example, after then US Secretary of State Antony Blinken made critical comments about China's human-rights record at a high-level exchange in Anchorage, Alaska, in early 2021, senior Chinese officials called out the US for its own human-rights record in the aftermath of Black Lives Matter protests. Multiple red lines send mixed signals. Is the country drawing them determined to assert its global power, or is it in the grip of a national paranoia?

Red-line inflation makes compromise on one issue, while remaining unyielding on others, look like surrender. Claiming a profusion of existential threats may not only weaken credibility, thus incentivising adversaries to call a country's bluff, but may also raise the accidental conflict risks. By increasing the number of non-negotiable positions, multiple red lines reduce the space for effective diplomacy, without which leader-to-leader dialogues become all but meaningless.

Focused on threats rather than conflict resolution, China's red lines tend to concern sovereignty, territorial integrity, regime security, and national rejuvenation. By contrast, in the pre-Trump era, America's were related to rules, alliance credibility, deterrence, and non-coercion. As was the case in Anchorage in 2021, these different perspectives often result in the two sides talking past each other  -  potentially misinterpreting strong rhetoric as something more dangerous.

Any effort to limit red-line inflation is complicated by an asymmetrical aspect of the problem: While the US has increasingly emphasised the military threats posed by advanced technology, Xi's recent blunt remarks in Beijing suggest China has gone much further in sharpening its focus on Taiwan. Without conceding any ground on its other perceived existential threats, China has a more serious problem with red-line inflation than the US does. This phenomenon is at odds with Xi's emphasis on "constructive strategic stability" at the Beijing summit.

If left unaddressed, red-line inflation risks suffocating China's aspirations to be seen as a responsible steward of global affairs. Stephen S Roach is a Faculty Member, Yale University, and former Chairman, Morgan Stanley Asia
