Category: Editorial
Title: Real AI debate isnt about technology Its Part One

Real AI debate isn't about technology. It's about the choices we make

Technology. It's about the choices we make Human Development Report 2025 rejects fatalism and argues that the AI future depends on what societies choose to value, not the jobs it might replace In these moments of tangled emotions of hope and anxiety about AI, the 2025 Human Development Report (HDR)  -  A Matter of Choice: People and Possibilities in the Age of Artificial Intelligence  -  makes a promising claim: The trajectory of AI is not a technological inevitability, but a human choice. The report's core message that AI's impact will be defined by human decisions about its design, development and deployment offers balance in the overhyped narratives around the technology.

Perhaps one of the most important arguments the HDR makes is how AI acts like a mirror  -  "reflecting and amplifying the values, structures, and inequalities of the societies that shape it. AI does not act independently of us; it evolves through our decisions and our priorities." The HDR dispels the myth of technological inevitability. It also sheds light on the fact that if existing injustices and divides in society are not addressed, AI will entrench them further.

In this way, the HDR 2025 shifts the conversation on AI from the technology itself to people and how they reinvent themselves in the face of profound changes brought about by AI. Augmentation, not replacement The critical discourse on AI often imagines automation sweeping away human labour, efficiency trumping dignity, productivity superseding care. The HDR flips this: What if the question is not which jobs will be lost, but which qualities of humanity will we keep?

The HDR reminds us that AI's real power lies in augmenting human capabilities, not replacing them. AI can beat any human chess player. But we still prefer playing chess with other humans. AI has accelerated music-streaming, yet our hunger for live gatherings has increased. Machines can amplify human potential, not erase it.

Two-thirds of US firms are not using AI for worker task replacement but rather product innovation, and only a quarter use AI for task replacement. The work of care, control and epistemic agency The report points to three intertwined factors: Agency in work, control over one's role, and epistemic agency, i.e. the ability to understand and influence how systems work.

In a world where firms deploy AI to monitor timing, productivity and output, humans risk becoming fungible assets. But the HDR calls to build a complementary economy  -  one that recognises human workers at every stage: coder, user, label-trainer, maintainer, ethicist, relational steward. In low-and medium-HDI countries, 70 per cent of respondents expect AI to increase their productivity; two-thirds expect to use it in education, health or work within a year.

That presents an opportunity if we shape AI to be a co-steward of humanity, honouring human relations and amplifying our potential. Human connection and development Human development isn't measured merely in output, but in our capacity to live lives we value. The HDR emphasises that AI must serve flourishing.

Human connection, reflected in caring for loved ones, community interdependence and relational work, remains vital. But AI risks undermining it if designed without heed to relational dynamics. In India, where vast care-economies exist, AI deployment must not treat care as a cost to be optimised but as a fabric to be honoured, in a way that doesn't perpetuate inequities.
