Category: Editorial
Title: Right prescription

Right prescription

Public needs full information on drugs recalls Drugmaker Sun Pharma's "voluntary withdrawal" of 11 eye drop brands has exposed gaps in the domestic medicine recall process. Drug companies and the drug regulatory system, it would seem, are not transparent enough. This marks a stark contrast to how drug companies inform on recalls in markets like the US, for example.

Rules under India's Drugs and Cosmetics Act (1940) outline the process to recall medicines and devices  -  be it voluntary or mandated by the State or Central drug regulatory authority. These are spelt out under para 7 of Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Products. Companies are required to keep both authorities informed if they are withdrawing a product from the market for reasons varying from mislabelling to contamination or other quality reasons, for example, and they are required to keep details of the returned inventory, among other things.

In the latest eye drops recall, the company and regulator have fallen short in informing consumers through a public alert, or communication. In June, opthalmologists had flagged possible contamination in a branded eye drop, and in July, Sun Pharma alerted business partners on its voluntary withdrawal of 11 eye drop labels. No details were shared publicly on the reason for withdrawal, the batch numbers of withdrawn products, or the manufacturing facility where the product was made, for example.

A listed company, Sun did not inform the stock exchanges. In fact, some retailers and regulatory officials seemed to be unaware of the eye drop recall, raising concerns that consumers may have used these products. Contrast this with reports on the recall of an epilepsy product by the same company, around the same time, but in the US.

Details are available on the recall, the nature/classification of recall, the number of bottles recalled down to the lot numbers. While the company has done the right thing in voluntarily withdrawing a product in India, it should have gone further to alert the public as well. Central and State drug regulators have started issuing public alerts on products that are not fit for consumption.

This process needs to be implemented with greater intent for recalled products, as a standard operating procedure  - irrespective of the product's "criticality". For companies to claim they have alerted distributors and may not have visibility on the last mile is no argument. The company and the drug regulator should ensure the supply chain and the public are prevented from using the faulty product.

The Centre has called for all supply chain entities to be digitally connected  -  so companies and regulators can track products and inform the network of distributors, stockists and retailers, in minutes. Consumers can be informed of recalls through instant messaging  -  a process used by aviation and food delivery companies. The rules must be re-examined, if necessary to clearly spell out the responsibilities of producers with respect to recall, and the punitive consequences of lapses in this regard.
