Category: Editorial
Title: Right direction uncertain pace Part Two

Right direction, uncertain pace

The profit pool is already thin, outside a few names. In FY26, the life insurance industry earned about `66,000 crore of profit before tax, of which LIC alone earned about `57,000 crore. Nine out of 25 insurers reported losses. A quick evaluation suggests private life insurers earned a margin near 2% and four of them accounted for 83% of that profit.

This is possibly a good proxy for the industry's finances. To be fair, large insurers may gain from the reform. One research report expects lower payouts to support value of net business margins, and LIC and SBI Life are seen as relatively insulated. This could push the insurance-for-all target from 2047 to a latter date.

This also brings us to the industry's large capital requirement to build capacity to provide insurance cover. Global insurers haven't rushed in since May. The FDI liberalisation track record  -  around Rs 20,000 crore of cumulative inflow when FDI was at 26%, Rs 34,000 crore at 49%, and only Rs 27,000 crore at 74% -  shows that each relaxation has only progressively brought less capital even when the market value of the capital has grown.

Before elaborating on the fourth consequence, let us evaluate the question of development versus regulations. IRDAI carries a dual mandate, and the outcomes suggest development has taken a back seat. In the last two decades, the authority has focused on the supply side of the market  -  that is the industry and the products.

It has made far less effort to augment demand, which takes us to the fourth consequence  -  savings are moving elsewhere, and there has been little effort to make insurance affordable through fiscal incentives. Insurance competes for the household rupee. Its share in household savings is gradually declining, with savings moving to the capital markets.

If the industry is struggling to distribute and sell, cost compression must not accelerate that shift of retail investors to capital markets. The consultation paper is seeking responses before it is finalised. Some measures that can soften the impact and yet meet the stated objectives which could deliver the reform are as follows.

The first possibility, with regard to commission and EOM compression, is having a calibrated glide path by scale and vintage so that newer and smaller insurers are not placed in the same bracket as the larger ones, and also the larger ones get adequate time to rebuild their distribution approach. The second step could be sequencing the cuts: Reduce the first-year payouts and raise persistency-or loyalty-linked payouts (in case of general insurance) in steps, and publish a renewal schedule with the caps. The third measure, to go with the first two, would require building in review points (tied to published outcomes as reported by the industry periodically), observing conduct and compliance while simultaneously understanding the industry's pain, examining complaints and customer feedback, studying dark patterns, and evaluating penetration growth.

Then, perhaps, a course correction in the glide path will help both the industry and policyholders. The reform was seen to be effected on account of mis-selling and heavy costs of providing cover due to acquisition and overheads. However, it demands a balanced approach that ensures investors stay put in the industry and companies see the challenge of commission and EoM compression as an important strategic path.

By Ashvin Parekh The writer is Managing Partner, Ashvin Parekh Advisory Services LLP.
