Category: Editorial
Title: Ripple effects of West Asia conflict Part Two

Ripple effects of West Asia conflict

The uptick in Brent spot prices due to rising geopolitical tensions in West Asia since end-February marks a reversal of a steady downtrend that has seen them decline by one-fifths in 2025. Since mid-March, they remain at $100 plus a barrel after Israel struck Iran's South Pars gasfield and Tehran retaliated shortly thereafter with an attack on Qatar's liquefied natural gas facility at Ras Laffan. Markets remain jittery after President Donald Trump's statements that he would like to take over Iranian oil - as he did with Venezuela after capturing its president - and would obliterate its power facilities if the ongoing pause on the US's strikes does not result in a deal.

The prospect for costlier oil is bad news for India as it imports 88% of its energy requirements, which would widen its trade deficit and push up domestic prices. As these imports have to be paid for in US dollars, this would result in further downward pressures on the rupee that is testing lows of Rs 95 to a dollar. India must enhance its energy security by building reserves that can take care of disruptions, at least over the short term.

The government stated that the country's oil stocks, mostly with the domestic oil companies, were enough for 74 days. The strategic reserves, however, are modest with just six days of crude stockpiles and must be built. Above all, the policy imperative must be to aim for greater self-sufficiency through higher domestic oil and gas production over the medium term.

Unfortunately, this is not happening, as domestic crude production is steadily falling over time. To be sure, the ruling dispensation is seized of this imperative and is incentivising domestic producers and global giants for exploration and production by enacting the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 2025. The eleventh round of the open acreage licensing policy has just been launched, which together with the earlier tenth round, opens up 262,817 square kilometres for exploration.

India needs to go all in to boost domestic production to be resilient in coping with energy shocks in the future. Written by N Chandra Mohan The writer is an economics and business commentator based in New Delhi.
