Category: Editorial
Title: Room for more easing Part Two

Room for more easing

Meanwhile, the plausible upside risk to food prices in the coming quarters could be offset by the record high stock of rice and wheat maintained with the Food Corporation of India. Furthermore, the benign global crude oil prices could provide room for fuel price cuts at the retail level in case of any adverse scenario. Overall, we see a scope for an additional 25-50 bps rate cut, given that real rates remain elevated and the inflation trajectory offers comfort.

Although recent economic data appears resilient, much of the momentum seems driven by festive demand and GST relief, leaving its sustainability in question. Benign core inflation, a large scope for downward revision to the headline inflation estimates, persistent spare capacity in the economy, and continued uncertainty around global trade negotiations should prompt the MPC to deliver a 25-bps cut in the December policy, especially after the central bank has signalled scope for further easing recently in a conference (reinforcing the view from the October policy). Moreover, the forward guidance will need to strike a balanced yet marginally dovish tone to provide markets with the reassurance required to navigate prevailing uncertainties.

Additionally, the recent pressure on INR and the consequent FX intervention has led to a tightening of system liquidity. The system liquidity has fallen to 0.4- 0.6% of net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) (lower than the RBI's preferred 1% level) since mid-September after staying elevated above 2% of NDTL for most of 1HFY26. As market sentiments remain wary amid delays to the US-India trade deal, we see room for additional pressure on INR impinging on liquidity.

Overall, we see the need for `1-1.5 trillion worth of durable liquidity infusion by the RBI in the rest of sFY26. Although liquidity easing measures can precede the policy announcement, we expect the RBI to announce OMO purchases in the December policy once the full impact of the CRR cut has played out. This would help support bond markets, as the adverse demand-supply situation stabilises.

By Upasna Bhardwaj, Chief Economist, Kotak Mahindra Bank Views are personal
