Category: Editorial
Title: Seeds of change

Seeds of change

Draft Seeds Bill pushes transparency, but has some flaws The Draft Seeds Bill, 2025, which is open for comments and is likely to be placed before the ongoing Parliament session, is aimed at curbing the sale of spurious and poor quality seeds to farmers. The draft Bill says at the outset that it wishes to promote ease of doing business for the seed industry through reduced compliance burden. While its approach of protecting farmers as well as incentivising the seed industry is a sensible one, the draft needs to address certain ambiguities and imbalances.

The EoDB provisions may ease supply constraints. A clause that provides for multi-State permit for entities selling across States will do away with the difficulties of obtaining clearances from each State in this regard. The Bill also makes a distinction between "trivial" and serious offences and invoking criminal provisions selectively, which may curb harassment and rent-seeking.

A bold move being contemplated in the Bill is allowing the private sector to participate in the testing of seeds through a system of accredited laboratories. While this may help ease the burden on the ICAR set-up, these testing centres must inspire confidence. The Bill promotes transparency and traceability in the seed industry by mandating that all marketable varieties be registered, and the seeds be sold with a QR code on the pack that tells you where it has come from.

All stakeholders in the value chain will have to be registered as well, and this includes producers, seed contractors for many farmers, nurseries and processing units. Seed health, too, has to be certified on the pack by recognised laboratories. The proposed Bill does incentivise bonafide seed industry players to produce good seeds in larger quantities.

In keeping with this thrust, it has turned away from price control, opting to use that lever only as a last resort; product choice, competition and transparency are expected to work instead. However, a major lacuna in the Bill, unlike its earlier avatars, is that it does not provide for any system of compensation apart from the consumer courts for quality and performance lapses. This must be resolved.

An especially disquieting aspect of the draft Bill is its ambiguity over whether farmers will be criminalised for producing their own seeds and distributing them locally  -  a practice through the ages that has preserved India's unique gene pool of varieties. An unchecked move to brand all produce, with the compliance costs associated with it, could drive out even small seed producers and leave the space for large players. This may also lead to appropriation of GI or IP rights vested in communities.

The rights of farmers spelt out under the Prevention of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act should not be diluted. There is an indication of divergence here between Section 1(2) of the draft Bill and Section 39 (i) iv) of the above-mentioned law. These issues must be addressed to strike the right balance between promoting the interests of farmers and the seed industry.
