Category: Editorial
Title: Skill India as herculean challenges Part Two

Skill India as herculean challenges, Galgotian blunders

There is no better way to implement the NEP priority of lifelong learning. Since vouchers follow the trainee rather than the institution, it incentivises delivery and outcomes. It creates a competitive market. Vouchers can also be good tools to provide upskilling for Artificial Intelligence (AI)-led transition, providing targeted skills in AI, digital and green skills.

They can be used for needed segments such as enhancing women workforce participation or provide foreign language learning for global labour markets. Purchasing power in the hands of learners will drive quality and accountability and be a driver of a demand-based skills market. Singapore and Croatia have implemented them well.

It will also encourage school leavers to pursue vocational courses instead of defaulting to degrees, which often inflate tertiary enrolment. The idea of skill levies Skill levies on organised industries, used in more than 90-plus countries, is another fundamental idea. A well-designed skills levy can sustainably finance skills.

In 2017, we had designed and recommended a Reimbursable Industry Contribution (RIC) to the Government of India for the Twelfth Five Year plan. At that time there were 62-plus countries doing it; now, 90-plus have adopted it, for good reasons. Across Latin America, in Germany, Singapore, South Africa and South Korea, such models have been used to ensure industry ownership of skills and to create stable funding insulated from political and budgetary cycles.

Linking contributions to firm size and payroll and then returning them to the industry when training has happened makes employers in-charge of skill development. Today, skills programmes are supply-driven and government-financed. Employer engagement in today's system is inadequate. We can move from an employer-engaged to an employer-owned system through the RIC reform.

It is tested world-wide and there is a small demographic window for this policy choice. Finally, real time skills demand must feed into policy. Understanding this trajectory needs transparent rules. A mandate for online job boards to share data in a form that safeguards their business interest but also provides aggregate understanding to the government is needed.

Data mining and AI modelling can help. Periodic/one-off skill gap studies (as has been the norm) cannot achieve this goal. The data shared can be made public in the National Career Service (NCS) portal. India's goal to construct a labour market information system has not materialised. This may be the only workable way for skills planning.

Enough strategic errors have been made. By 2040, the demographic dividend will end. It is time for a course correction  -  we know we can. We hope, we will. Santosh Mehrotra is a former professor at Jawaharlal Nehru University, and Research Fellow, IZA Institute of Labour Economics. A. Singh is a computer engineer, has a Masters in Business Administration from the Indian School of Business (ISB), Hyderabad, and is a skills practitioner
