Category: Editorial
Title: Skill India as herculean challenges Part One

Skill India as herculean challenges, Galgotian blunders

Reforming skill financing is crucial to harness India's demographic dividend A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity requires a herculean effort. India's demographic dividend, that ends by 2040, is one such opportunity. Several European Union countries and China have successfully financed skill systems.

In these countries, approximately 50% of secondary-level students are enrolled in vocational education streams. In India that share is 1.3%, reflective of an educational system that neglected school education till 1990, and vocational education till 2006. However, in 2020, India's National Education Policy (NEP) said: "By 2025, 50% learners will be exposed to vocational education." "Exposed" still reveals an attitudinal problem among policy designers.

Vocational education in most countries is around 2% of the education budget. For China and Germany it is 11%. India has no data that is publicly available due to fragmented training schemes in Ministries. India's strategy rests on Budget announcements which falter year-on-year. A scheme that was celebrated last year is forgotten the next year.

Consider the internship scheme announced in Budget FY2026: only 5% of the allocated funds were spent and its design proved ineffective. CAG reports, issues raised The herculean task of making India "the skill capital of the world" is inconsistent with "Galgotian" blunders. Issues of financing skills are crucial.

The Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) in 2025 audited the flagship Skill India scheme, Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)-2015-22. Ten years ago, it had similarly looked at compliance and oversight issues of skill institutions. Both reports raise issues of financial impropriety.

In 2015, the CAG dealt with financial reporting delays and unclear accountability of disbursed funds. In 2025, the report mentions that 94.5% of bank accounts were invalid and approximately 41% of trainees in short-term training achieved placement. How have we evolved from 2015 through 2025? When the short-term skill ecosystem was started, the vision was to create a vibrant public-private market for skills.

Over the past decade, however, the focus on quantity through short-term training has yielded limited results. Since the CAG's direct concern is fund use, we list three ideas for it. Imagine a scenario where no operational funding was provided by the PMKVY. What if the amount upward of ₹10,000 crore spent annually was extended as skill loans to students?

This would have led to more choices for students, improved the quality of institutions as they competed for enrolment, and promoted demand-driven skill development, benefiting students as they are from economically weaker backgrounds. A model similar to that for educational loans could have been followed. The worst case would be non-performing assets, which we have ways to handle.

It is not too late. We can do so now and use skill loans better. There is already a policy framework in place. Priority needs to shift: part of PMKVY funding could be through skill loans. Of course, design work is needed to roll this out, but it is doable. It needs a product-market that has banks and non-banking financial companies on board.

It is worth questioning why the National Skill Development Corporation began as a non-banking finance company, later became a funder for training partners, and now primarily implements government schemes. Using skill vouchers Use of skill vouchers is another trainee-based skills financing idea, more so for distribution of public funds. It allows flexibility for policymakers and a choice for students.
