Category: Editorial
Title: Stabilising the rupee would be immensely Part Two

Stabilising the rupee would be immensely challenging

Need strategic belt tightening It is debatable if the rupee is undervalued and will autocorrect once the war ends. Although India's CAD has been moderate for several years, the persistent structural weakness in the capital account creates a new perspective on how one should look at currency valuation. More importantly, several global assessments hold that even were the war to end soon, production and supply disruptions will take many more months to normalise.

We certainly support the idea that the rupee must find its own value, with the RBI ensuring an orderly depreciation, although there's always an overshooting risk, pressing the panic button. To restore macroeconomic balance, therefore, the way forward is to slow imports at a much faster pace than only currency weakening can deliver. In our judgement, we've reached the time when prudence calls for some degree of strategic demand compression to support rupee stabilisation.

The policy toolkit should carefully examine the balance sheets of households, corporates, and governments (Centre and states) to find headroom and mark vulnerabilities. Currently, it is the household balance sheets that appear to be having the least space and most susceptibility to price and interest rate increases  -  though raising the GST rate for high-end imported luxury goods would be appropriate. The government has been careful to calibrate petroleum-gas price increases so far; more hikes will be needed for targeted volume compression.

But excessive passthrough runs the risk of stoking inflation and forcing a monetary policy reset, which would result in generalised demand compression. Among businesses, the micro, small, and medium enterprises are most exposed to raised costs and supply shortages, and on the credit-guarantee lifeline. Equally, some big corporates have high forex exposure; these are susceptible if unhedged.

Some others are holding piles of cash but not spending. Perhaps this is the time to expedite asset monetisation, even privatisation, and barter this cash for publicly owned assets. Rationalisation of wasteful government revenue expenditure is always welcome. But this isn't a good time to cut subsidies or any other social-or income-support spending although efficient targeting is needed.

Therefore, consider slowing down capex, especially projects with high import intensity. Some degree of fiscal compression may sound bitter and result in growth sacrifice. But it will send the right signals. It has been three months since the war started, exposing the Indian economy's faultline of being unable to retain and attract foreign investment.

It has morphed into a BoP crisis, subjecting the rupee to speculative attack. The government and the RBI have waited too long. It would be prudent to judge the present impasse as "crisis-like", if not a full-blown crisis per se. The currency needs to be stabilised sooner to rebuild confidence in the economy and redraw a road map for long-term structural adjustment to help the elephant resume its journey towards Viksit Bharat.

Written by Renu Kohli The writer is senior fellow, Centre for Social and Economic Progress
