Category: Editorial
Title: Stabilising the rupee would be immensely Part One

Stabilising the rupee would be immensely challenging

With the rupee under pressure amid geopolitical tensions and slowing foreign capital inflows, policymakers face difficult choices on managing the balance of payments, exchange rate stability, and economic growth. As Mint Street grapples with a falling rupee and the urgency to stabilise it following the extending West Asian war, many experts reckon that the seeds for the current crisis were sown much before. In January 2025, we were among the earliest to flag the worrying trend of slowing inflows on the capital account side, particularly the sharp deceleration in net FDI - this was making exchange rate stabilisation harder for the RBI despite massive interventions in both spot and forward markets.

The pattern has not significantly reversed since, raising the spectre of speculative trading in the forex market as the prospect of current account deficit (CAD) widening looms large. The RBI has been quick to intervene, as it often does, restricting derivatives' market activities. Market participants, domestic and foreign, were pained by the central bank's actions and have been wondering since what more could come.

The government was equally quick to raise gold and silver import duties, which had been very effective in narrowing the CAD in the 2013 taper-tantrum episode. But financial dailies are abuzz with policy speculation, again reverting to the 2013 playbook for clues  -   restrict capital outflow, raise dollar deposits to boost FX reserves, and increase the policy rate to stabilise the currency. But the central bank isn't rushing through any capital account measures  -  it feels the economy's fundamentals are strong, the rupee is not overvalued, and FX reserves are enough to contain short-run volatility.

And raising the interest rate is the Monetary Policy Committee's call. Stuck in the swamp But the rupee's continuous downslide is unnerving, testing the market limen as the elephant appears to be stumbling once again. Underneath the demeanour of apparent calm, policymakers appear to be in a quagmire, unable to read the pulse of the crisis.

Is it a short-term balance-of-payments (BoP) problem that will subside once the war ends? Will the foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) return no sooner than the AI bubble bursts? And will the CAD normalise once the trade agreements produce dividend? Or is it more structural as many experts insist, seeking decisive reform interventions?

There seems to be an air of exasperation as in the last 12 years, several good reforms  -  with evidently acknowledged positive benefits  -  were introduced. Sure, more could be done but that would require time, which is critical as the war persists. Should the RBI quickly raise NRI deposits, say $50 billion, to buy some time?

In 2013, banks helped mobilise $34 billion to clean up the RBI's $32.6-billion FX forward sales book, its future liabilities, and steady the rupee. In contrast, the central bank's position looks more fragile this time than over October 2024 to February 2025. Its forward book swelled sharply to $104 billion in March 2026, including $30 billion from three-year buy/sell swap auctions, which are effectively forex borrowings under the cover of liquidity support measure.

But all this could not contain the rupee's slide. A persistent BoP deficit means that any cushion from additional borrowing would come at steep costs, compound future FX liabilities, and dampen the medium-term outlook. Some restrictions on domestic capital outflow could help but that risks unwelcome signalling to foreign investors.
