Category: Editorial
Title: Strait of Hormuz oil flows dry up How this Part One

Strait of Hormuz oil flows dry up: How this affects India, and the options ahead

Dry up: How this affects India, and the options ahead A large number of trading houses, insurers and vessels have suspended shipments through the maritime passage. According to reports, hundreds of tankers have dropped anchor in open Gulf waters. The ever-widening conflict involving Iran, US and Israel has severely disrupted oil and gas flows through the Strait of Hormuz  -  a critical artery for global energy supply.

After Israel and the US launched military strikes in Iran, Tehran retaliated by targeting other Gulf countries that house American military interests. Late Saturday, Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) transmitted messages to vessels saying that the strait had been closed. There was no official declaration to this effect from Tehran.

Whether or not Iran is blocking the Strait, a large number of trading houses, insurers and vessels have suspended shipments through the maritime passage. According to reports, hundreds of tankers have dropped anchor in open Gulf waters. Suspension or heavy curtailment of oil and gas flows through the Strait is bound to have implications for the global energy markets, including India, which depends on the waterway for receiving a bulk of its oil and gas imports.

The impact will worsen with the duration of the disruption, though experts believe it won't be a protracted one. According to industry insiders and experts, India is well positioned to stave off a major short-term supply shock when it comes to oil imports as it has alternative sources of supply. It will, however, have to pay higher energy prices as a result of the conflict.

In the case of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and liquefied natural gas (LNG) imports, where India's dependence on the Strait of Hormuz is relatively higher than oil, the challenge could be greater  -  securing supplies while also paying a higher price for imports. India's near-term options The Strait of Hormuz, the world's most important oil transit chokepoint, is a narrow waterway between Iran and Oman that connects the Persian Gulf with the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea. It handles approximately one-fifth of global liquid petroleum consumption and global LNG trade.

Around 15 million barrels of crude pass through the Strait every day. While some pipelines exist in the Gulf states to bypass the waterway, their capacity is limited. Even at full utilisation, nine million barrels per day (bpd)  -  or 9% of global demand  -  would remain structurally at risk if the strait is closed, according to industry experts.

Around half of India's total oil imports  -  roughly 2.5-2.7 million barrels per day (bpd)  -  pass through the strait from countries such as Iraq, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Kuwait. India is the world's third largest consumer of crude oil with an import dependency level of over 88%. The majority of the country's gas consumption is also met through imports, and oil and gas supplies from West Asia are critical for India.

Indian refiners already have crude inventories of over 10 days, along with around a week's worth of fuel stocks. To cover any potential shortfall in import volumes, India could draw on its strategic petroleum reserves, accelerate spot procurement from non-Hormuz regions, and deepen supply contracts with alternative suppliers. Diversification options include increased sourcing from Russia, the US, West Africa, and Latin America.
