Category: Editorial
Title: Strait of Hormuz oil flows dry up How this Part Two

Strait of Hormuz oil flows dry up: How this affects India, and the options ahead

Moreover, there is continued availability of Russian cargoes in the Indian Ocean and Arabian Sea region, including volumes in floating storage. This volume build-up was a result of Indian refiners substantially reducing their intake of Russian crude. "In a scenario where Middle Eastern imports become constrained or show signs of disruption, Indian refiners  -  potentially with policy backing  -  could pivot back to Russian cargoes relatively quickly.

From a national energy security standpoint, this flexibility provides India with an additional buffer against short-term geopolitical shocks. Overall, while a Strait of Hormuz disruption would create immediate volatility, India's diversified sourcing strategy and the presence of alternative barrels in nearby waters reduce the risk of a sustained supply crisis," said Sumit Ritolia, Lead Research Analyst, Refining & Modeling at commodity market analytics firm Kpler. According to him, LPG imports are the "bigger vulnerability" for India, as the country imports 80 - 85% of its LPG needs, with the majority sourced from Gulf suppliers and almost entirely transiting Hormuz.

And unlike crude, India does not maintain strategic LPG reserves of comparable scale, making LPG flows more logistically sensitive in a disruption scenario as India has "thinner structural buffers" when it comes to LPG. Similarly, around 60% of India's LNG imports pass through the strait and, like LPG, there are no structural buffers in place. Unlike crude, where enough availability is there in the spot market, LPG and LNG spot cargo availability is thin.

The supply situation for these two fuels might become challenging for India in the event of a protracted Hormuz closure. Likely duration, price impact As tensions between Washington and Tehran refused to die down and the risk of possible US military strikes and regional conflict became increasingly credible, benchmark Brent crude prices ended the week well over $72 per barrel, the highest since late July of last year. With the major escalation in the conflict over the weekend, the war premium in oil prices was expected jump.

In early Asian trade on Monday, Brent jumped significantly to over $82 per barrel, before giving up some gains. At 10:30 am IST, Brent was up 6.5% at $77.5 per barrel. Every $1 per barrel increase in oil price could raise India's oil import bill by $1.8-2 billion on an annualised basis. "This (disruption in vessel traffic in the Strait of Hormuz) appears to be driven by heightened tensions and precautionary decisions by ship operators and insurers rather than a confirmed physical blockade by Iran.

From a market perspective, however, the distinction is secondary. Whether the Strait is closed by force or rendered inaccessible by risk avoidance, the impact on flows is largely the same. Nations with strategic petroleum reserves may take action and release volumes if the disruption of the Strait risks being extended.

Unless de-escalation signals emerge swiftly, we expect a significant upward repricing of oil at the start of the week," said Jorge Leon, senior vice president and head of geopolitical analysis at Rystad Energy. As in the case of physical oil supply, the oil price trajectory in the near future would largely depend on how the conflict shapes up, and for how long energy flows via Hormuz remain suspended or disrupted. In scenarios of a prolonged regional conflict and supply disruption from Hormuz, oil prices could top $100 per barrel, according to analysts.
