Category: Editorial
Title: Strong health systems for all with better Part Two

Strong health systems for all with better public spending

A lot of the money goes to curative care at the secondary and tertiary levels  -  at the cost of preventive, primary health care. According to estimates from the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, India spends less than one-fourth of public health money on preventive care. Purely from a health impact viewpoint, public health money is best spent on classic public goods such as infectious disease control or sanitation, where there is a 'market failure'  -  rather than on the expansion of relatively cheap curative health services (for instance, treating common illnesses) that the private sector is already supplying competitively.

Recent evidence bears this out: public health spending markedly improves infectious disease outcomes, through greater access, vaccination, and sanitation, but does far less for maternal and child health or non-communicable diseases, making a strong case for strategic allocation. As populations age, more will need to be done for chronic conditions in terms of addressing risk factors, early detection, and management. Better governance, better health The third is to improve governance and operational efficiency.

Good governance is key: if corruption is reduced or the quality of bureaucracy improves, countries see greater positive effects of public health spending on desired health outcomes, such as child mortality. The converse also holds: simply increasing spending where governance is weak is unlikely to improve outcomes. Moreover, with the increasing decentralisation of public service delivery, it is becoming imperative to focus on improving governance at the subnational level.

Within governance, there is a crucial role for public finance management. While a well-formulated budget is a good starting point, impact will only be achieved if the budget is implemented efficiently. There is a need to improve budget credibility and cash disbursement. Involvement of public health providers in budget processes can enhance both their accountability and motivation.

Improving procurement processes can help achieve greater value for money in health sector resources. As the pandemic has taught us, budgets should be flexible to respond to unforeseen circumstances. That said, the case for enhanced spending remains: its returns are greatest precisely where health outcomes are poorest; hence, money that is well-directed can help narrow gaps across countries.

Nalini Gulati is Editorial Adviser at 'Ideas for India'. Vikas Dimble works at the Isaac Centre for Public Policy (ICPP), Ashoka University. Both writers co-author 'The Care Gap', a living literature review supported by Coefficient Giving
