Category: Editorial
Title: Sunny prospects

Sunny prospects

Green power markets will benefit from further reforms The year 2026 could turn out to a bright one for the renewable energy sector. The foundations were laid last year. More than 50 GW of renewable capacity was added  -  a record  -  with solar accounting for over four-fifths of this addition. Installed solar and wind capacities crossed the milestones of 125 GW and 50 GW respectively.

This strong performance enabled India to cross two significant thresholds: total renewable energy capacity surged past 200 GW, and non-fossil fuel-based electricity generation capacity rose to more than half of total installed capacity  -  a psychological leadership position for renewables. Alongside, the solar module manufacturing industry built up a cumulative capacity of 100 GW. Reinforcing the momentum achieved in 2025 is the fact that 69 GW of solar and 30 GW of wind capacity are already under construction, with much more capacity under various stages of tendering.

It is, therefore, time for India to consolidate. The environment is favourable. Notably, the achievements of 2025 came despite several headwinds: a shortage of domestically manufactured solar cells mandated for domestic content requirement projects; grid-related issues leading to solar curtailment (at times as high as 40 per cent on certain days); and the loss of the US export market due to the Trump effect (97 per cent of India's solar module exports go to the US).

While the trajectory of the US market remains uncertain, the other two constraints are likely to ease, driven by increased availability of domestic cells and accelerated deployment of battery energy storage systems. On the policy and regulatory front, 2025 saw important reforms. General Network Access was operationalised, and the day was split into solar and non-solar hours, unlocking transmission infrastructure for use during otherwise idle periods.

While 2026 inherits a rich bounty, complacency would be misplaced. Achieving the next phase of growth will require careful crafting of policy and regulatory frameworks. Several such measures were initiated in 2025, and much now depends on how effectively they are carried through. An overhaul of the Electricity Act, for instance, is in the offing.

The draft Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2025, seeks to truly open up the sector by allowing multiple distribution companies to operate in the same area. This reform is critical, not least because the Supreme Court has directed discoms to liquidate their regulatory assets (the cost-revenue gap to be recovered later) within four years -  a move that will inevitably result in higher tariffs. It would be a travesty of justice for a monopolist to pass on rising costs to consumers without the disciplining force of competition.

Another eagerly awaited reform is the government's initiative to roll out the India Energy Stack, often described as 'Aadhaar for electricity'. The IES could enable innovations such as virtual power plants and peer-to-peer electricity trading, significantly expanding the market for renewable energy.
