Category: Editorial
Title: The question the Great Nicobar project Part One

The question the Great Nicobar project raises: Is what can be justified also just?

Project raises: Is what can be justified also just? The doctrine of public trust demands that the state hold vital natural resources  -  such as air, water, forests, coasts  -  in trust for the benefit of the public, not only of the present generation but of those yet to come. That intergenerational promise must also extend to our past  -  or what survives of it, not because of us but despite us Lost in the debate surrounding the Great Nicobar Island project is a fundamental question: Is what can be justified necessarily just?

A short Bengali poem by the late Binoy Majumdar can be paraphrased thus: "When some explorers 'discovered' an island, they found people already living there. If the island was 'undiscovered', how could it be inhabited? And if people were already living there, how could the explorers 'discover' it?" Perhaps the maverick mathematician-poet was examining the colonial Doctrine of Discovery  -  the idea that the first European nation to "discover" a territory in the Americas acquired exclusive rights over it.

Around the same time, British colonists in Australia treated hundreds of Aboriginal nations as inhabitants of terra nullius  -  nobody's land. In India, Lord Dalhousie's Waste Land Rules enabled the takeover of vast tracts of "unproductive" forests and commons beginning in the 1850s. The Land Acquisition Act, 1894, made the government's decision the final word for a public purpose, pushing railways, mines and plantations across forested tribal regions, such as Chota Nagpur, Santhal Parganas and Central Provinces.

Few would dispute that each of these policies was profoundly unjust and immoral, if not outright criminal, by today's ethical and legal standards. Even fewer would argue that the world is worse off because of the railways, industries and cities that emerged from those interventions. But that is no reason to repeat them.

More than a century after the colonial framing of "public purpose", no claim of public, strategic or national interest can be exempt from the burden of justification today. Especially when a mega project is envisaged in a rainforest island that is home to several endemic wild species and to the world's only population of fewer than 300 indigenous Shompen people. The Rs 90,000-crore Great Nicobar Island project spanning 166 sq km at the southernmost tip of the archipelago includes an international container trans-shipment port, an integrated township, a civil-military airport, a power plant and luxury tourism facilities.

Many have demonstrated otherwise but, for a moment, let us accept that the defence installation's location is non-negotiable, that the trans-shipment port can be financially viable, that the sprawling township is necessary, that the geological risks are manageable, and that the project's strategic importance is paramount. But even if every justification is taken at face value, none answers the more important question: Is the project just? By its own submission, the plan requires 73 sq km of tribal reserve areas.

On its balance sheet, the project has provided for adding 77 sq km of peripheral land to make up for the loss. The indigenous people are not to be dispossessed, merely displaced. In 1823, the US Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall weighed in on indigenous rights: "The rights of the original inhabitants were, in no instance, entirely disregarded; but were necessarily diminished." Shifting them from parts of their ancestral home will unsettle the Shompen and the Great Nicobarese, the other indigenous tribe inhabiting the coastal areas of the island.
