Category: Editorial
Title: The question the Great Nicobar project Part Two

The question the Great Nicobar project raises: Is what can be justified also just?

Neither have consented to the plan. The very assertion that these people can be pushed around at will disregards their traditional land use practices. The proposed arrangement echoes an unsettling past: "Is it supposed that the wandering savage has a stronger attachment to his home than the settled, civilised Christian?… Doubtless it will be painful to leave the graves of their fathers; but what do they more than our ancestors did or than our children are now doing?" That was US President Andrew Jackson's message to Congress in 1830.

Two centuries have passed since. Today, ancestral rights of indigenous groups to their ancestral land are well established. The United Nations acknowledges that respecting their self-determination and traditional territories is essential to prevent exploitation and displacement. We do not need to look far to know what risks our civilisation poses to the indigenous people.

Contact with outsiders has historically exposed these isolated communities not only to unfamiliar diseases  -  such as measles, tuberculosis, syphilis and respiratory infections  -  but also to substance abuse, social disruption, economic dependency and sexual exploitation. Since the arrival of British settlers in the 1850s, the Great Andamanese population fell from an estimated 35,00-60,000 to fewer than 650 in just five decades. Today, less than a hundred survive on Strait Island.

A similar fate befell the Onge on Little Andaman. The hunter-gatherers could not adjust to forced settlement, and many died of alcoholism, depression and suicide. The Jarawa resisted outside contact for much longer. But the world entered their home through the Andaman Trunk Road that cut through the heart of the Jarawa reserve in the 1990s.

Today, the Jarawa face the same pitfalls of disease and alcoholism, with even their women falling victim to trafficking and abuse. Knowing this history, can we still justify exposing the Shompen to the same risks? Or are we, in our ambition to build our own "Hong Kong" at their home, echoing an anachronistic entitlement that every corner of the land must be put to productive use on our terms?

"Our manifest destiny is to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions," wrote American political columnist John O'Sullivan in support of annexing indigenous land in 1845. Nearly two centuries should have been time enough to leave behind such impulses. The doctrine of public trust demands the state to hold vital natural resources  - such as air, water, forests, coasts  -  in trust for the benefit of the public, not only of the present generation but of those yet to come.

That intergenerational promise must also extend to our past  -  or what survives of it, not because of us but despite us. We are duty-bound to protect their right to simply exist where they are, as they are. Indeed, public interest may sometimes justify imposing the cost of a larger good on a few. But not when those few are the very last survivors of our war on old ways of life.

Written by: Jay Mazoomdaar The writer is associate editor, The Indian Express.
