Category: Editorial
Title: The US postTrump China strategy Part Two

The US' post-Trump China strategy

On-again, off-again "deals" offer no hope for lasting stability, not least because of their reliance on the conflicts they purportedly aim to resolve - without conflict, there can be no deals. At the same time, China is far from a white knight providing stable political leadership in a tumultuous world. This suggests that a major shift in the political winds is the best hope for US-China diplomacy.

Of course, Xi has consolidated power, making such a shift practically impossible in China's one-party system. Political change may prove equally challenging in the US, which is under the spell of Sinophobia and riven by Trump's Make America Great Again movement. That doesn't mean America can't rediscover its magnanimous spirit and once again embrace the mantle of global leadership, as it did after World War II by supporting its defeated enemies and rebuilding Western Europe with the Marshall Plan.

Avoiding kinetic conflict with China will depend on the US living up to its reputation as a "shining city upon a hill." But to get from the chaos of today's polarised America to a new era of coherence, civility, and conflict resolution may require nothing short of a political watershed. For many Americans, such a shift currently seems improbable as Trump tightens his grip on government. But since the mid-1850s, presidential party affiliation has changed hands between Republicans and Democrats in 19 of 44 elections; since the end of WWII, the frequency of party turnover has been even higher.

The same applies to control of both the House and the Senate. All this points to the likelihood that MAGA will not dominate America's future in the long run. For that reason alone, it is not too early to start thinking about rapprochement with China as a key feature of a post-Trump foreign-policy agenda, especially as pulling it off will most likely require a new architecture of engagement.

By Stephen S Roach, Faculty member, Yale University and former chairman of Morgan Stanley Asia
