Category: Editorial
Title: The forgotten power of philosophy Part Two

The forgotten power of philosophy

As he writes in his autobiography- 'It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel themselves honoured by the humiliation of their fellow beings.'  Unfortunately, we failed to understand this fundamental truth that our mind is the silent architect of our life. So, if there is restlessness in our mind and shrewdness in our behaviour, then there will be complete chaos in our lives as well as in society. One can say that Philosophy unites a world which is deeply shattered in the name of region, religion, caste, race and ideology.

A major challenge for philosophy is its decline in academia because of fewer enrollments of students in this subject. It is beyond comprehension why a subject which is considered the mother of all other subjects is losing its importance amongst students. Universities across the country face this dismal condition, and the lack of opportunities in this field is one of the most important reasons.

Our policymakers should take note of this. Even though the National Education Policy-2020 makes several references to the Indian Knowledge System and Philosophy, our lawmakers and educationists must make more efforts to address the problem of the dwindling popularity of this subject. One may suggest that this subject be introduced in the class 11th and 12th of the CBSE and ICSE Boards, as it's been done at the school level in some state boards.

One must keep in mind that Philosophy is not just an academic subject rather also concerned with the upliftment of humanity. Its role is very intense and wide. As a mother of all subjects, it is indispensable for the intellectual and ethical growth of human beings. The value of philosophy should not be evaluated in getting final answers but in the very process of seeking them, which elevates human life and understanding.

It helps individuals navigate life by fostering an unselfish, open-minded approach that reduces anxiety and increases the ability to understand, justice, and love. As Nobel Laureate Bertrand Russell wrote in his well-known essay 'The Value of Philosophy' in 1912 - "If all men were well off, if poverty and disease had-been reduced to their lowest possible point, there would remain much to be done to produce a valuable society; and even in the existing world the goods of the mind are at least as important as the goods of the body. It is exclusively among the goods of the mind that the value of philosophy is to be found; and only those who are not indifferent to these goods can be persuaded that the study of philosophy is not a waste of time." By Rajib Ray | Satyendra Srivastava Both authors are professors in the Department of Philosophy, Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi.; views are personal
