Category: Editorial
Title: The sad demise of Chinas economic debate Part Two

The sad demise of China's economic debate

With domestic demand lagging, this leaves the Chinese economy heavily dependent on exports at a time when external demand is facing stiff headwinds, owing to geopolitical tensions and increased protectionism. Meanwhile, the new plan pays only lip service to the Chinese consumer, long the most obvious candidate to fill the void left by the property market's post-crisis weakness and over-investment in both the public and private sectors. When it comes to consumer-led rebalancing, senior Chinese leaders continue to talk the talk but are unwilling to walk the walk.

Instead of addressing the excesses of fear-driven precautionary saving that hobble long-term discretionary consumption, the new plan, like the old one, promotes trade-in campaigns for cars, appliances, and other durable goods that simply borrow from demand that would have been fulfilled in any case. Had I been at the CDF this year, I would have made that point for the umpteenth year in a row. Sour grapes for not having been invited this year?

It's more a sense of disappointment in the Chinese government's denial of a serious growth problem and its fixation on quashing debate in favor of the "the good stories of China." I will always remember my first appearance at the CDF in 2001. Then-Premier Zhu Rongji had launched the conference a year earlier as a platform for engagement and debate between Chinese government ministers, academics (foreign and domestic), and some business executives. It underscored Zhu's brilliance as a strategic thinker: If China's senior leaders couldn't handle tough feedback immediately after the completion of the National People's Congress, the biggest policy meeting of the year, the thinking was that they didn't deserve their seats on the State Council.

Back then, I had long discussions with Zhu and his successor, Wen Jiabao, over the imperative of consumer-led rebalancing. True to the CDF's original spirit, we didn't always agree. But there was never a problem being frank and open in expressing disagreement. Chinese leaders recognized the importance of constructive debate.

Sadly, that was then, not now. China will suffer as a result. By Stephen S Roach, Faculty member, Yale University and former chairman, Morgan Stanley Asia Challenging year
