Category: Editorial
Title: The great protein squeeze and why India Part Two

The great protein squeeze  -  and why India should cut taxes on whey

India's whey-protein imports run ~23,000 tonnes a year and are rising ~20 per cent annually while domestic production is negligible. So, why is the largest milk-producing country in the world (India accounts for 24 per cent of global milk production) importing almost all of its whey? There are multiple factors at play here.

India doesn't make enough cheese, and when it does, it's not the right kind to get whey as the byproduct. An average American consumes about 18 kg of cheese a year; an average Indian's cheese consumption is a rounding error. India's dairy runs on milk, curd, ghee, butter and paneer, and the leftover whey from paneer is "acid" whey, mineral-heavy and costly to purify, not the "sweet" whey that cheese-making yields and that protein powder actually needs.

So India's whey is both scarce and the wrong kind. Then, there's the structure of the industry. Roughly 60 per cent of the milk that's sold in India never touches the organised sector at all. And when it does, it is dominated by the big cooperatives, such as Amul, Mother Dairy or KMF, which face a structural limitation.

With state governments as partial owners and government appointees on their boards, cooperatives naturally prioritise basic nutrition over premium products. The private players who do have the appetite and the capital for it run into the opposite problem: They can't reliably lay their hands on enough milk. A country drowning in milk and yet nobody quite placed to take advantage of the demand boom.

To remedy this, my colleague Anisree Suresh, in a 2024 paper, recommends we go upstream and fix the industry structure. We need to corporatise the cooperatives, so they can raise capital, professionalise management and buy the technology that value-added dairy demands. Further, taper the subsidies and financial support that flow overwhelmingly to them, which would push cooperatives towards being market-driven.

We also don't need to regulate milk from "non-veg" cows, but have simple labelling requirements that will do the job. Finally, given the nature of the structural issues that limit whey production, a high import tariff on whey makes little sense  -  there is no infant industry to protect here. A processing ecosystem and cheese preference in the nation cannot be tariffed into existence.

Therefore, cutting the basic duty to around 5 per cent, closer to the GST rate for whey protein, makes immediate sense. Yes, the world has made whey more expensive, but we don't need to make it way more expensive with our taxes. Written by: Anupam Manur The writer is professor of Economics, Takshashila Institution
