Category: Editorial
Title: The US trade deal gains from economic Part One

The U.S. trade deal, gains from economic diplomacy

Industry must use the opportunities that the India-U.S. trade deal presents India's trade playbook is working strongly, steadily and at scale. Its new trade architecture resembles a newly built expressway, anchored in strategic trade agreements that will enable faster, more predictable movement for trade.

After concluding a major free trade agreement with the European Union (EU), the United Kingdom and other partners, India has now secured a consequential trade deal with the United States. The road to this deal was neither short nor simple. Shaped through a demanding and intricate process, the deal stands as a testament to the strength, steadiness and foresight of Indian negotiators.

After nearly a year of sustained dialogue, technical negotiations and quiet diplomacy, India and the U.S. agreed upon the lower tariff of 18%. The reduction of U.S. tariffs on Indian goods to this competitive level is a huge boost to Indian exports, providing improved market access, policy certainty and avenues for new strategic partnerships.

A growing network of partnerships The India-U.S. trade deal represents an important outcome in India's expanding network of international trade partnerships. The trade agreements with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), the U.K., and the EU give India preferential market access to the whole of Europe.

Agreements with Australia and New Zealand make India a key partner of the Pacific, trade agreements with Oman and United Arab Emirates provide greater access to West Asia, and the latest deal with the U.S. deepens India's stronghold in America  -  a clear reflection of India's deep integration with the world. The U.S.

is the largest import market in the world and India's biggest export destination, accounting for almost one-fifth of India's total exports. Indian exports to the U.S. span a wide range of sectors, which includes apparel, gems and jewellery, agricultural products, footwear, leather and several other manufacturing products, supporting both employment and manufacturing value chains in India.

With the elevated U.S. tariff levels of 50% last year, several Indian exporters were at a competitive disadvantage in this critical market. The revised tariff not only provides meaningful relief and improves India's relative position vis-à-vis competing suppliers but also provides a constructive basis for advancing discussions under the ongoing India-U.S.

Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA). By easing immediate trade frictions, the agreement creates space to address broader issues such as regulatory cooperation, market access and supply chain under the BTA. The gains and broader implications The clearest gains from the tariff reduction are likely to accrue to employment-intensive export sectors, particularly apparel.

The U.S. is the world's largest apparel import market, and with Indian exports now facing an 18% tariff, lower than key competitors such as Vietnam and Bangladesh, Indian manufacturers regain price competitiveness in several high-volume categories. Similar dynamics apply to gems and jewellery (where margins are highly sensitive to tariff changes and the U.S.

remains a critical destination), as well as to marine products, processed foods, footwear and leather (where even modest tariff moderation materially improves landed costs). A lower tariff will enhance export viability across these sectors and support India's positioning in diversified global supply chains, further encouraging these industries to go for capacity expansion. On the whole, the reduction in U.S.
