Category: Editorial
Title: The American dream under a visa siege Part Two

The American dream, under a visa siege

Other nations, such as China, Mexico and the Philippines, which have many citizens living in the United States, are also affected by these changes. As globalisation connects economies and cultures, these policy changes could significantly impact international relations and economic cooperation. There is a growing call for immigration reform.

As people and families navigate this uncertainty, they need robust policies and support systems more than ever. Immigrant rights advocates and other organisations are working to improve the US visa process. They aim for the government to recognise the challenges individuals and families face and create easier pathways to obtain visas.

Additionally, the Trump administration plans to revoke the visas of approximately 200,000 foreigners who entered the country for tourism or business but sought to extend their stay by applying for asylum. Earlier this week, the Trump administration began reviewing a new proposal to overhaul the H-1B visa programme, signalling another potentially significant change to the employment route used by thousands of Indian professionals. This proposal could impact the US economy by at least $100 million annually.

Ongoing advocacy and reforms are essential to ensure that the immigration system meets the diverse needs of individuals seeking opportunities in the United States. Recently, US courts have limited some of the Trump administration's measures, including a federal judge's ruling that overturned a previous decision. But all these have not made the aspirants pull back or stop; they continue towards the completion of their "American dream".

The suspension of specific visa categories has created challenges and uncertainty for many foreign nationals, particularly those from India. This decision has raised concerns for families, workers, and students who rely on these visas for various opportunities in the United States By Kalyani Shankar The writer is a popular columnist; Views presented are personal.
