Category: Editorial
Title: The dollar inflow puzzle Part Two

The dollar inflow puzzle

This would in turn put banks in a spot, and will be a lose-lose situation for the system. The other possibility is open market operations (OMOs), which have been announced where government securities are sold to banks. The RBI holds around Rs 18 lakh crore of government papers and can easily offload them.

It would mean a loss of revenue for the central bank, but a gain for banks. However, for banks, the return must be compared with the cost of 6.75%; else there will be a negative carry. This will be central to the success of OMOs. From the market's point of view, the continuous sale of government paper by a calendar will mean excess supply which will depress bond prices.

As the price of bonds varies inversely with the interest rate, bond prices will decline with higher interest rates. This will mean all future government borrowings will be at higher cutoffs. While the aggregate amount may not be too large to absorb for the government, it will fuel a bond market sentiment of a rate hike in the immediate future.

One can then expect yields to go up in anticipation. An option that can be considered is to expedite the government borrowing programme in the second half so that the market sentiment is checked. But this will only defer the issue as domestic deposit flow would follow the normal course. This also means that even if the RBI decides to increase the repo rate based on the committee's recommendations, deposit rates would not increase, and banks would persevere with the existing structure based on their asset liability management positions.

This will come in the way of monetary transmission. Thus, there is a question mark about how to manage liquidity in the domestic market resulting from an overwhelming flow of dollars. The fact that the economy is growing will mean steady demand for credit. But surpluses will remain and must be addressed.

Getting in forex flows and maintaining liquidity at appropriate levels has implications for the bond market, which makes setting of interest rates even more interesting. By Madan Sabnavis The writer is Chief Economist, Bank of Baroda.
