Category: Editorial
Title: The struggle to count womens labour Part One

The struggle to count women's labour

En's labour Recognising women's labour requires a major policy shift In the poem, The Woman's Labour (1739), Mary Collier writes: "When Harvest comes, into the Field we go, And help to reap the Wheat as well as you. Or else we go to the Ears of Corn to glean; No Labour scorning, be it e'er so mean; But in the Work we freely bear a Part, And what we can, perform with all our Heart." It is a powerful way of pointing to how women's labour often goes unseen. A 2023 United Nations report showed that globally, women spend 2.8 more hours than men on unpaid care and domestic work.

The struggle to count women's labour continues. While domestic labour has increasingly entered the public discourse, the emotional and mental labour in sustaining relationships, managing household dynamics, and supporting the well-being of others continues to go largely unacknowledged. This uncounted labour which plays a critical role in the smooth functioning of families and societies, is rarely measured or rewarded.

Shirin Rai, a professor, argues that "...many who cope with this work in contexts of poverty and of violence, are constantly told that their everyday labour  -  both paid and unpaid to maintain the rhythms of life-ecology do not count in/as production. ... as a global society, we fail to recognise this labour in our everyday lives, and we continue to deny its appropriate inclusion in discourses about work, in our national budgets, and in policy frameworks".

This raises a critical question: what structural and ideological forces render this labour unseen and undervalued? Feminist scholars such as Isabella Bakker, Nancy Fraser and Shirin Rai have argued that economic and policy priorities have long marginalised care work by framing it as secondary to "productive" labour traditionally performed by men. The privileging of male breadwinner employment, the relentless focus on GDP growth, and the emphasis on physical infrastructure investment over social infrastructure have all contributed to the systemic devaluation of care-related work.

These priorities often result in the diversion of public resources away from services that support caregiving, such as childcare, elder care, and mental health services domains that are disproportionately occupied by women. Antonella Picchio, a professor at Cambridge, argued that "the biological aspects of human reproduction were used to hide the historical and social aspects of the gender division of labour. The separation between the process of production and that of social reproduction of labour between men and women took new forms and shaped new power relationships within the traditional context of women's subordination".

Thus, in our view, the act of non-inclusion of women's direct and indirect labour is a continuation of the subjugating practice of considering women's labour as non-productive. A closer look at global legislation and statutes reveals that the efforts to recognise women's labour institutionally are very scattered. Few countries have introduced laws, constitutional provisions or policies recognising unpaid care work/domestic/emotional labour.

Article 338 of the Bolivian Constitution recognises that work at home is an economic activity that creates added value and produces social welfare and wealth. Housewives are entitled to social security in accordance with the law. Trinidad and Tobago has the Counting Unremunerated Work Act, 1996 requires the statistical authorities to measure unremunerated work (housework, caring for children/elderly/disabled), break it down by gender, and assign a monetary value.
