Category: Editorial
Title: The quest for digital utopia Part Two

The quest for digital utopia

We stand at the gates of a new world, in which intelligence is not scarce, where consumers will experience magic every day, where enterprises become living systems - in a workforce comprising humans, agents, and robots. Digital utopia will not remain an aspiration, but an operating system of a better civilisation. However, what is not guaranteed by technology must be designed by society.

A utopia designed by society As the cost of intelligence plunges, and traditional organisational structures get dismantled, traditional mechanisms to distribute surpluses will get emasculated too. Disintermediation will happen at an unprecedented scale, with brokers, junior analysts, paralegals, and mid-level managers being among the many displaced. Various reports, including Citrini Research, Anthropic's "Labor market impacts of AI" and WEF, have discussed multiple facets of this.

It emerges that jobs involving digitisation are at greater risk, compared with those which predominantly involve manual labour, like agriculture, delivery, plumbing or construction. WEF's "Future of Jobs Report 2025" actually projects that between 2025 and 2030, 92 million jobs will be displaced, while 170 million new jobs will be created. Digital transformation must thus be a conscious decision, designed by society rather than society becoming a victim.

We have some imperatives and many choices. We have to unleash a reskilling revolution, as the vast majority risks redundancy without being trained to perform projected jobs on offer. What's more, reinforcing core human skills including analytical thinking, curiosity, resilience, social influence, cognitive skills, collaboration, and environmental stewardship is an imperative.

Equally, the entrepreneurial wave needs added encouragement as it is a very powerful vehicle for wealth distribution. "Ease of entrepreneurship" is critical to "ease of doing business". We tax human income. Instead, compute, data, and algorithmic output could be taxed. Corporates too, like before. When the shift is complete, healthcare, energy, transportation, and education could become human rights.

Universal basic income too. AI-led farms could provide food, 3D housing could provide shelter, and AI-driven solar farms could provide limitless energy. In essence, we've spent centuries defining human worth by what we do. A new post-utility social contract will emerge - sooner than we think. By Shailesh Haribhakti & Anil Nair, Haribhakti is an independent director on many boards.

Nair is Founder, ThinkStreet
