Category: Editorial
Title: The anatomy of US public debt Part Two

The anatomy of US public debt

From early 2022, inflation reared its head and persisted, prodding the Fed to raise rates once again, stabilising the government's borrowing costs at around 5 per cent. When Trump returned in 2025, he announced an ambitious agenda to reduce expenditures (through the exertions of the newly created Department of Government Efficiency headed initially by Elon Musk), and promised that he would reduce the deficit even while he offered business cronies significant direct tax benefits. Limited spending cuts The promise of expenditure reduction through efficiency improvement yielded nothing however  -  expenditures actually increased (Chart 4).

This was partly because 'austerity' notwithstanding, rising interest payments accounted for a growing share of current expenditures, neutralising the benefit of the limited expenditure cuts (Chart 5). In the event, despite US Secretary of the Treasury Scott Bessent's declaration that he intends to reduce the federal deficit to 3 per cent of GDP, it remains at 6 per cent. But that is not the real challenge the government faces, which comes from other sources.

To start with, the Trump administration finds itself in an unusual fiscal bind  - its debt is increasing partly because it is borrowing to cover rising interest payments on past debt. Secondly, this occurs at a time when the costs of the war against Iran are exhausting its defence stockpiles necessitating massive spending increases. The administration had put in a supplemental appropriations request of $67.1 billion for the Department of Defence in June, which awaits Congress approval.

But in July it managed to push through by a narrow 216-214 vote a $95 billion budget reconciliation package which reportedly includes $60 billion for defence. That too awaits final approval. So as opposed to $972 billion of funding for defence in financial year 2026 ending September, the request for national defence in FY2027 is placed at $1,154 billion.

That would raise expenditures and widen the deficit, intensifying the debt-interest payment spiral. Finally, with the Iran war and closure of the Strait of Hormuz keeping oil prices high, inflation in the US at around 3 per cent is above target and could rise further. Contrary to expectations, the signal from the new Federal Reserve Governor Kevin Warsh delivered at the Jackson Hole symposium in late August is that he is committed to the Fed's 2 per cent inflation target and will rely on the interest rate as the main tool for inflation management.

That possibly signals a policy rate hike, and definitely suggests that there are no plans for a rate cut given inflation. That would further widen the deficit and expand already bloated debt volumes. The only way out for the administration to raise taxes and enhance tax revenues if it wants to reduce the deficit.

But that is out of question for Trump, who is intent on appeasing big business and is already faced with an affordability crisis that precludes indirect tax increases. That leaves the US government mired in a debt trap of its own making. By CP Chandrasekhar & Jayati Ghosh
