Category: Editorial
Title: The forgotten power of philosophy Part One

The forgotten power of philosophy

Is the lamp that illuminates all sciences; it provides the techniques for all action; and it is the pillar which supports dharma." -Preface of the Arthashastra by Kautilya Philosophy occupies a special place in academia because of its distinctive style. While in other subjects there is an answer to every question, in philosophy there is a question for every answer, so it is said that philosophy is the mother of all academic disciplines and is also the climax. The most striking speciality of philosophy is that it makes us wiser rather than intellectual or logical.

Intelligence or logic can be misused, but not wisdom. We all know how some of the most logical sophist judges in Greek Philosophy awarded capital punishment to Socrates, one of the wisest figures in the world. Some people allege that the world of philosophy and philosophers is imaginary. Their ideas are esoteric and do not have any concern with the problems of ordinary people in society.

This allegation reflects a very superficial understanding of Philosophy. To realise how profound the role of the philosopher is, it is necessary to cite a few instances. Few of us know that on March 21, 1977, the then Prime Minister, Mrs Indira Gandhi, declared the end of the Emergency on the suggestion of Jiddu Krishnamurti (as accounted in the biography of J.

Krishnamurti, written by P Jayakar), a renowned humanist and philosopher, whose book 'Freedom from the Known' is considered a revolutionary work in academia. Similarly, on November 8, 2010, when the then US President Barack Obama addressed both Houses of the Indian Parliament, he cited the influence of four Indians - Swami Vivekananda, Rabindranath Tagore, Mahatma Gandhi and B.R. Ambedkar.

This acknowledgement underlines the global contribution of philosophers, and that of Indian philosophers. A philosopher influences our inner self more than the external environment, which is why Socrates used to refer philosopher as a 'doctor of the soul' who prescribes proper attitudes and practices to nurture our mental health and happiness. In a world where high economic growth rates, intellectual skills, and advancement of technology are considered as criteria of a prosperous society, philosophers administer some new thought process to understand human life in a deeper sense.

John Dewey, whose ideas on philosophy of education work as a trailblazer, once said, 'Education is not preparation for life, education is life itself.' There is hardly anyone who can ignore its significance in the present rat-race competitive world. In the era of artificial intelligence and Chat GPT, teachings like "Appo Deepo Bhava"- Be your own lamp of Gautama Buddha, Socrates' proposition "An unexamined life is not worth living", or Swami Vivekananda's call "Strength is life, weakness is death" are the core values of our existence. No sensible society should neglect these insightful ideas.

If most of us had been philosophical thinkers, we would not have been misled by scheming politicians and fake godmen all these years. Philosophical ideas can play a very significant role in addressing these types of socio-political and ethical malaise in society. We evaluate Mahatma Gandhi as a champion of truth and non-violence, but his most impactful teaching is his unmatched emphasis on human dignity.
