Category: Editorial
Title: The right to a fair trial at the crossroads Part Two

The right to a fair trial at the crossroads

Bail and legal inconsistency In the meantime, at the level of the trial court and the High Courts, conflict and inconsistency in judicial decisions continue to persist. Recently, the High Court of Delhi (correctly) granted bail to the Kashmiri human rights activist, Khurram Parvez, who had been incarcerated for more than four years without trial. This length of time in prison without trial weighed heavily with the High Court in deciding to grant bail.

What is curious, however, is that the judge who (correctly) granted Khurram Parvez bail had denied bail in the Delhi Riots cases the previous year, when the accused in that case had already spent more than four years in jail. Nor is this the only instance of the same judge speaking with different judicial voices: in the Delhi Riots cases themselves, on the same underlying facts, the same judge delivered opposing bail judgments a year apart. It is trite to say that no case is identical to the other.

On an issue as basic as pre-trial incarceration, repeated inconsistencies across cases and courts undermine the rule of law and, ultimately, damage the cause of fundamental rights and individual liberty. These questions assume particular significance because laws such as the UAPA, in particular, have an undeniably political character, and it has been demonstrated across the world that states are only too happy to interpret these laws in a way that blurs the line between political dissent and what the law defines as "terrorism". Recent attempts in the United Kingdom and the United States around dissent linked to Israel's genocide in Palestine are examples of this.

What the judiciary must ensure In such a context, it becomes particularly important for the judiciary to ensure that such laws are not weaponised. While legal interpretation is subjective, one thing is  -  and should be  -  crystal clear: that the state cannot keep people behind bars for years without trial. It makes a mockery of having a system based on the rule of law, and one that  -  to use the old adage  -  entrenches the process as the punishment.

It is unclear whether  -  or when  -  the Court's larger Bench will opine on the issue. In the meantime, however, there remain contentious UAPA cases, where individuals continue to be imprisoned without trial, and their time spent in custody continues to increase with no resolution in sight. Indeed, one such case is that of Umar Khalid and Sharjeel Imam, the last two individuals among the accused student activists who remain in custody in the "Delhi Riots cases".

After the denial of bail by the Supreme Court, the case is once again coming up before the trial court this week; in the meantime, five years in prison have turned into six, and the cost  -  both to the lives of the imprisoned individuals and to the rule of law  -  has continued to become steeper. Ultimately, therefore, this issue is both about individual human lives and about our commitment as a society to human and democratic values. As these cases continue to arise, the courts will once again have an opportunity to reaffirm these values, whether in individual bail cases before trial courts or when it comes to laying down the law before the Court.

It is to be hoped that this happens, and that the cycle of endless imprisonment without trial is broken. Gautam Bhatia is a Delhi-based lawyer
