Category: Editorial
Title: The need to press pause on prepoll freebies Part One

The need to press pause on pre-poll freebies

Pre-poll freebies Essential welfare services for the poor differ fundamentally from indiscriminate largesse aimed at electoral gains. Last week, the Supreme Court called out the practice of political parties announcing handouts on the eve of elections. Not only are such indiscriminate largesse a burden on state finances, these may create dependency among beneficiaries and even crowd out capital expenditure, explains KR Shanmugam Highlights Rs  2.46 L-cr: Annual outlay for women-focused unconditional cash transfers in 15 states IN FY26 Essential welfare services for the poor differ fundamentally from indiscriminate largesse aimed at electoral gains 20% of GSDP is the CEILING for sustainable outstanding liabilities as per FRBM framework Welfare policies vs freebies Welfare policies are schemes carefully targeted at vulnerable and marginalised groups to enhance long-term employment prospects, and generate multiplier effects in the economy.

But freebies are benefits distributed free of cost. Freebies include loan waivers, unconditional cash transfers, free transport, free electricity, free scooters or bicycles, free laptops, free televisions, and similar benefits. These measures often provide immediate relief or consumption gains but may not necessarily create sustainable long-term benefits.

Many such schemes are universal in nature and are introduced primarily to attract voters, sometimes without adequate financial planning or credible revenue sources. This can lead to fiscal stress for state governments. Since essential services such as education, healthcare, electricity, and public transport cannot be efficiently organised by individuals, citizens elect governments to provide them.

How-ever, the extent to which such services should be provided free depends on a government's fiscal space. Unlike indiscriminate giveaways, welfare schemes are usually backed by explicit budgetary allocations. Rationale for freebies Supporters argue that certain free provisions are necessary to reduce structural inequalities.

Free foodgrains, healthcare services, and cash transfers have helped reduce malnutrition, prevent medical impoverishment, and provide social safety nets. According to NITI Aayog, free bicycle schemes for schoolgirls in Bihar and West Bengal increased enrol-ment, reduced dropouts, and improved educational outcomes. In the short term, freebies may also act as local economic stimuli.

Proponents also point out that governments routinely extend tax concessions, loan write-offs, subsidised land, power, and capital incentives to industries and corporates. Targeted benefits for women, farmers, youth, and senior citizens also help build electoral coalitions while delivering measurable social assistance. Courts have observed that election promises of freebies cannot automatically be classified as bribery or corruption.

Announcements with eye on polls Currently, 15 states operate unconditional cash transfer schemes for women under various names such as financial inclusion or empowerment programs. These include Telangana's Mahalakshmi Scheme, Maharashtra's Mukhyamantri Majhi LadkiBahin Yojana, Karnataka's Gruha Lakshmi Yojana, West Bengal's Lakshmi Bhandar Scheme and Tamil Nadu's Kalaignar Magalir Urimai Thittam in. Although framed as empowerment initiatives, many of these were introduced before major elections, highlighting the growing political importance of women voters.

During poll seasons, political parties frequently announce ambitious expenditure commitments. Parties in Tamil Nadu, for instance, have promised hike in monthly cash transfers for women, one-time household grants of `10,000, guaranteed ownership of motorcycles and permanent houses, and assured employment for at least one family member. Handouts can be harmful Critics argue that essential welfare services for the poor differ fundament-ally from indiscriminate largesse aimed at electoral gains.

Excessive freebies may create dependency among beneficiar-ies, weakening the urge to work or pay taxes. Free power and loan waivers impose opportunity costs by diverting funds from education, healthcare, and employment generation. Free power can encourage overuse of groundwater and lead to resource depletion.
