Category: Editorial
Title: There needs to be an urgent change in the Part Two

There needs to be an urgent change in the way Indians think about landfills

Therefore, developing India-specific emission models is the need of the hour for producing credible GHG inventories and supporting national climate commitments. One very significant development is the way landfills are monitored. Conventional systems heavily depend on field-level inspections, groundwater sampling and visual observations.

While these methods are highly regarded, they fail to capture the real-time changes happening on the site. Today, advances in geospatial technologies are making it possible to observe landfills with a high level of detail. High-resolution satellite imagery can observe landfill expansion over time. Thermal sensors can detect underground fires before they become visible at the surface.

Hyperspectral imagery has the potential to identify subtle changes in soil, vegetation and surface moisture associated with leachate migration. Synthetic Aperture Radar can detect ground deformation caused by waste settlement, while drones provide detailed three-dimensional models for operational planning. Artificial intelligence (AI) is one of the finest human innovations.

If AI is integrated with field observations, these technologies enable real-time environmental monitoring, helping in better decision-making at the policy level. There needs to be an urgent change in the way people think about landfills. They can no longer be considered as just disposal sites and dump yards.

Instead, they need to be given the same scientific attention that is given to dams, wastewater treatment systems, rivers, etc. Their efficiency affects the groundwater quality, biodiversity conservation, public health and many other sectors. The future doesn't need a larger number of landfills, but it is about redesigning the entire lifecycle of waste, from handling to disposal.

Improved segregation at source, efficient recycling systems, composting of biodegradable waste, extended producer responsibility, landfill gas utilisation, biomining of legacy dumpsites, and leachate treatment, when integrated with real-time environmental monitoring, will lead to sustainable management of landfills. As India moves toward a circular economy transition and becomes a developed nation by 2047, proper management of landfills is a must. Even the world's most effective landfills need engineered facilities for residual waste.

The success of waste disposal lies in how intelligently they are designed and monitored. Garbage mountains are often seen as a failure. But in reality, they reveal the hidden environmental costs of linear consumption and the urgent need to identify waste as a resource, which can be used somewhere else before it reaches the landfill.

The future of landfill management will primarily depend on the use of satellites, drones and sensors in monitoring, but also on how scientific innovation can play a key role in the development of sound policies and responsible consumption. That is when Indian landfills can become secure systems, safeguarding both people and the planet. By Pondharshini Ponnusamy Views expressed are the author's own and don't necessarily reflect those of Down To Earth
