Category: Editorial
Title: This years likely belownormal monsoon is one Part One

This year's likely below-normal monsoon is one more warning: India must pay heed to water stress

Monsoon is one more warning: India must pay heed to water stress Civilisations have flourished and perished because of water. India has been witness to that itself. Therefore, we will be doing ourselves a big favour if we do not treat water conservation and management as an avoidable luxury but as an existential necessity.

On April 13, the India Meteorological Department issued its first update for the coming monsoon season. The monsoon season is expected to be mostly below normal. The probability of it being even above normal to excess is almost ruled out. More importantly, many of the rainfall districts will face below-normal rain.

Very few areas of the country will receive normal to above-normal rainfall. This is mainly due to the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) effect. El Niño and La Niña are two weather patterns that occur in the Pacific Ocean. They are part of a larger climate phenomenon called the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO).

Both have significant effects on global weather, influencing rainfall and temperatures. El Niño typically leads to reduced monsoon rainfall, while La Niña tends to strengthen the monsoon. ENSO is expected to set in, in June. But the effect will begin to be felt in July. So, the current expectation is that ENSO will have its effect in the second half of the monsoon season rather than the full monsoon.

However, as we write this, ENSO is developing rapidly in the Pacific. It may occur even earlier. A couple of other minor consolations are the negative correlation between the Northern Hemisphere or Eurasian snow cover and the rainfall in the subsequent monsoon season. Between January and March 2026, Eurasian snow cover was below normal.

That augurs better for the precipitation during the monsoon season. Of course, that has been factored into the seasonal forecast. Second, the IOD  -  Indian Ocean Dipole  -  counterpart to ENSO, but in the Indian Ocean, will also be counteracting the effect of ENSO on India's Southwest Monsoon. But IOD is expected to have its effect only in the second half of the monsoon season.

This has already been factored into the rainfall assessment. Another minor relief is that the Super ENSO phenomenon, which has an even greater impact on the monsoon rainfall, is setting in much after India's monsoon season officially ends. So, India's rainfall will not be much impacted by the Super ENSO.

It is expected that this year's ENSO phenomenon will have a bigger impact on Southeast Asia, Indonesia and Australia. The ENSO effect usually lasts nine to 12 months. It will be good to treat this year's ENSO effect as yet another warning sign for the country to get its act together on water. In the past, ENSO occurred once every two to seven years.

Now, the gap between two ENSOs appears to have shrunk, and its intensity is also increasing. That is not good news. Second, while India's average rainfall is expected to hold up reasonably well in the years to come, notwithstanding this year's ENSO, at least until the end of the decade, it is widely known that precipitation will become narrower in both spatial and temporal scales.
