Category: Editorial
Title: Time to push for rupee internationalisation Part Two

Time to push for rupee internationalisation

Unbridled currency printing by the Federal Reserve to fight the global financial crisis and then the Covid pandemic has debased the dollar, making countries look for alternatives in reliable reserve currency. According to IMF's COFER (currency composition of official foreign exchange reserves) data, percentage of global foreign exchange reserves held in US dollars has declined from 64 per cent in 2017 to 56.7 per cent by the fourth quarter of 2025. But the interesting part is that share of other currencies in global reserves has moved from 2.5 per cent to 6.13 per cent in this period, indicating a move towards non-traditional reserve currencies.

Gold, the other safe-haven, is also emerging as a competitor to the dollar. Share of gold in global reserves more than double from 10 per cent in 2015 to 23 per cent now. Share of US treasury securities held by foreign countries is also moving lower. According to the US Federal Reserve, around $9 trillion or 32 per cent of US treasury securities is currently held by foreign investors.

This is down from almost 50 per cent holding of overseas investors in 2014. The role of dollar as a reference currency for settling foreign trade between third party currency increases its share in global trade invoicing. The US Federal Reserve notes that according to data collected from the SWIFT platform, the dollar's share of international payments (both trade and remittances) is about 50 percent currently.

Alternate mechanisms But increasing settlement of bilateral trade in local currencies can help speed the move away from dollar. This can be aided by creating alternative settlement and messaging platform for international trade. With the SWIFT platform, governed by the Bank of Belgium, the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, handling most of global payments from the US and Europe, any country evicted from the platform would come up against a wall in processing international transactions.

The BRICS Pay, which is being designed as a cross-border financial messaging system for the BRICS countries with their national currencies, is an alternative. But dominance of China in this system could be an issue. The larger BRICS countries including China and Russia are meanwhile developing their own messaging platforms, the CIPS (cross-border interbank messaging system) and SPFS (system for transfer of financial messages) respectively.

Interoperability between these platforms could be one way to develop a larger alternative to SWIFT. Central Bank Digital Currencies being developed by almost all countries can also provide a viable channel for cross-border trade settlement. According to Atlantic Council, there are currently 13 cross-border wholesale CBDC projects including Project mBridge which connects banks in China, Thailand, the UAE, Hong Kong, and Saudi Arabia.

While these are small steps, it is best to keep up the effort to internationalise the rupee, especially now when the global sentiment is tilted against the dollar By Lokeshwarri SK
