Category: Editorial
Title: Time to push for rupee internationalisation Part One

Time to push for rupee internationalisation

Higher use of rupee in cross-border payments will create demand and prevent a one-way downward spiral The ongoing crisis in the rupee, with the Indian currency edging near the 95- mark against the dollar, underlines the need for creating more demand for rupee outside India. The good news is that the usage of rupee for settling foreign trade has begun in a small way, in the last four years. The removal of Russia from the international trade messaging platform, SWIFT, following the invasion on Ukraine in 2022 has brought about a sea change in the way policy makers approach their foreign currency reserves and international payments.

Serious efforts are now underway to devise alternative platforms and channels for cross-border payments, diversify reserves away from dollar and to settle bilateral trade in local currencies. The US-Israel-Iran conflict is likely to give further impetus to this move as countries will now have to also sew up deals to ensure energy security, besides continuing to reduce their reliance on the dollar. Rupee internationalisation, which was a pie in the sky until a few years ago, seems a possibility now, given the increasing discontent against the dollar and the policies of the US administration in recent years.

This is closely aligned with increasing de-dollarisation or reduction in dollar dominance in global reserves and payments. Policy moves Policy makers across the globe received a jolt when Russia was ostracised from global payment ecosystem in 2022. The RBI too began initiating steps to increase international use of rupee around this time.

It allowed invoicing and settlement of foreign trade in rupee in July 2022. With India defying the sanction against Russian exports, India's trade with Russia, including the purchase of Russian crude and defence supplies have been settled in rupee since 2022. India has also entered into bilateral agreements with countries such as the UAE, Indonesia and Maldives for settlement of bilateral trade in local currencies.

In December 2023, regulations were relaxed further to allow cross-border settlement with all trading partners in local currencies and rupee. These moves have begun showing results. RBI data show that as of January 2026, 6.18 per cent of total exports of goods and services of India between April and January FY26 was invoiced in rupee, which was valued at ₹2.64 lakh crore.

This share had been fluctuating around 5.80 to 5.9 per cent since FY24. Share of rupee invoicing in total imports is 4.69 per cent. Share of rupee in settlement of Indian goods and services trade is however lower. The share of rupee in settlement of exports was only 2.76 per cent this fiscal year, while share in imports was 2.32 per cent.

The gap implies presence of intent, which needs to be closed soon. It is comforting to note that all countries are in the same boat, as far as need to reduce dependency on dollar goes. As on February 2025, permission had been given by the RBI to open 156 special rupee Vostro accounts by 123 foreign banks from 30 trading partner countries.

Around 26 Indian banks are involved in this. With resentment over the US' high-handedness growing following the West Asia conflict, the time is now right to push for greater usage of rupee in bilateral trades. Dollar dominance wanes Dollar's dominance, on the other hand, has been steadily waning in recent years.
