Category: Editorial
Title: Track record On the TatanagarErnakulam

Track record: On the Tatanagar-Ernakulam Express fire accident

The Indian Railways must spare no expense in installing safety features The Tatanagar-Ernakulam Express fire accident in Andhra Pradesh was a major one, in terms of severity if not the extent of casualties. Chance, quick thinking and timely action by railway staff and other agencies as well as enhanced safety measures adopted by the railways over time likely contributed to a low toll - one passenger. That the accident happened in the train's air-conditioned (a/c) coaches, however, points to the need for increased requirements in these coaches in terms of fire safety and response.

At around 12.40 a.m. on Monday, as the train approached Yelamanchili station, a passenger sounded the alarm after apparently noticing a fire. The use of the emergency chain alerted the train crew who took the train to the loop line which had a platform. The train was not scheduled to stop at Yelamanchili.

This helped passengers alight safely. The insides of two a/c coaches were gutted in the fire that agencies put out in about two hours. Over the years, the safety record of the Indian Railways has improved. The total number of accidents in 2024-25 was down by more than 70% compared to 10 years ago. Major accidents have, however, seen ups and downs year on year without an appreciable fall.

Fire accidents account for some 10% to 20% of accidents in a typical year. Fires are triggered by rolling stock defects and errors on the part of the railways as well as by passengers who carry inflammable, even explosive articles. The cause of the Tatanagar-Ernakulam Express fire is not decisively known as yet and an inquiry has been ordered.

Fire in a/c coaches has been a cause of concern and the railways has focused on them for fitment of fire warning and fighting systems such as portable extinguishers. The Indian Railways Annual Report & Accounts 2023-24 notes that fire and smoke detection systems have been fitted in some 20,000 a/c coaches; the goal is to fit all a/c coaches, including new ones, with such systems. The report says that all a/c as well as non-a/c coaches in passenger trains have fire extinguishers.

Railway authorities say that the fire alarm system in the Tatanagar-Ernakulam Express coach activated upon detection of smoke/fire, adding that the coach mechanic, bed-roll staff and the travelling ticket examiner alerted the passengers and used the fire extinguishers, which helped control the fire. Perhaps fixed fire extinguishing systems, which can also be used in electrical fires, can be considered for a/c coaches in all trains. These activate automatically in case a fire is detected and douse it completely.

No safety feature is too expensive.
