Category: Editorial
Title: Tripping up

Tripping up

Power shortfall calls for holistic reforms Last week, the government invoked Section 11 of the Electricity Act, 2003 mandating private firms to run captive power plants at maximum capacity and feed the surplus to the national grid. The number of thermal power plants with coal stocks running critically low had surged to 74 by September 19, from 45 at the end of August. A combination of factors  -  power demand rising sharply due to unusually warm weather, coal production hit in the June-August period and a slump in hydel output  -  contributed to the situation.

The order says: "The generators shall offer their available surplus generation, after meeting their own captive demand, through the power exchanges, in accordance with the applicable market regulations and procedures." The price of power on the exchanges has skyrocketed in these times to about ₹10-14 a unit, or more, on short-term contracts across States. Indeed, higher supplies in these strained times could bring down these prices, benefiting all buyers, including Discoms, which could be hit by a shortfall in renewables supplies in this period. This is the second time since 2022 that the government has resorted to this move.

While the use of captive generation is understandable in times of stress in an El Nino year, it should be the exception rather than the norm, as industrial planning is impacted. Instead, endemic demand and supply issues must be addressed. On the demand side, the use of time-of-day tariffs and smart metering has picked up, but is yet to achieve critical mass.

Only about 7.25 crore such meters have been installed so far, against a target of 25 crore by March 2026, a deadline that has now been deferred by two years. The spike in night-time demand continues, when solar power is not generated. Investment in battery storage is at a nascent stage. A recent report by Crisil says that 45-50 GWh of storage capacity is expected to be commissioned over FY27 and FY28.

This is perhaps a result of some States pushing for storage capacity. With this transformation, 'grid curtailment' will come down. Such stored power can be used to tide over periods of shortage. However, battery storage is capital-intensive, while pumped storage projects (PSP)  -  acting as mechanical water batteries  -  offer a cost-effective alternative.

However, given their location constraints, the path to 100 GW PSPs by 2036 offers little immediate relief. Agriculture remains a major consumer of power, because of 'free power' and the choice of water intensive crops as a result. In States such as Punjab, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, and Karnataka, grid power is free, while Maharashtra, Haryana, and Western UP charge a flat rate.

The PM-KUSUM scheme for solarising agricultural pumps is faced with a fate similar to smart meters, achieving only 25-30 per cent of its overall targets. Decentralised power generation on scale can make a difference. Finally, holistic demand and supply reforms must replace the temptation to tap into captive storage when power falls short.
