Category: Editorial
Title: Trumps vanity summit with Xi Part One

Trump's vanity summit with Xi

The US-China summit between Presidents Trump and Xi was marked by ceremony but lacked progress on trade, AI, Taiwan, and military conflicts, highlighting Trump's focus on image over substance. Long on ceremony but short on substance, the eagerly anticipated summit between US President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping was a disappointment. Perhaps not a major disappointment, as expectations were generally low, and as some talk is certainly better than no talk.

But on the major issues of trade, AI, Taiwan, and addressing China's role in two theatres of war, there was little or no progress. Instead, ceremonial flourishes substituted for substance, unmasking the summit as yet another Trump vanity project. On trade, the two-month extension of the truce  -  initially negotiated nearly a year ago in South Korea  -  was surprisingly short, implying that tariff uncertainty remains high.

Pre-summit chatter hinted at an extension of 6-12 months. Moreover, there were expectations of another round of Chinese purchases of US agricultural exports. Instead, the two nations made a joint post-summit announcement to cut tariffs on a total of $60 billion of "non-sensitive" goods, including US imports of electric blankets and magic tricks and Chinese imports of eels and emus.

On AI, the biggest issue facing civilisation, there was no meeting of the minds. The two superpowers committed to a loosely structured dialogue and dangled the possibility of an unspecified "hotline" for AI-related national-security issues. This bare-minimum achievement is far from the major breakthrough on AI safety many had hoped for  -  especially in the aftermath of the recent Hugging Face hacking incident and reports of other intrusions that have led some AI insiders to raise human extinction concerns.

The disappointing outcome of the summit  -  which merely paid lip service to such risks  -  is hardly surprising considering that Trump has doubled down on his hands-off approach to AI regulation. On Taiwan, Xi attempted to press the advantage he gained after the Beijing summit in May, when Trump described the pending $14-billion US arms package to Taiwan as a "good negotiating chip". In view of America's normally staunch commitment to arming Taiwan, the Chinese side saw this as a major concession, especially given that the deal already had congressional approval.

In his opening speech to last week's summit, Xi urged the US to "adhere to the correct position of opposing Taiwan independence". But doing so would be a stunning about-face on the "strategic ambiguity" that has long shaped US strategy towards Taiwanese sovereignty. Finally, China's role in the wars in Ukraine and Iran escaped scrutiny.

As the buyer of some 90% of Iran's oil exports and about 50% of Russia's, China is a major funder of both countries' military efforts. A new law gives the US president broad authority to address this activity through secondary sanctions and tariffs on those countries, like China, that indirectly support illegal wars. Don't count on it.

Fearful of spoiling the summit's optics, Trump made no mention of this political hot potato. By making little effort on the big issues, both in terms of staff preparation and bilateral talks, Trump was painfully transparent about what mattered most to him: impressing Xi and his entourage. Ironically, while the tightly controlled Chinese press delivered enthusiastic messaging of Xi's great successes at the summit, the US broadcast media were muted by Trump's White House ban on three major news outlets, a shocking crackdown on free speech.
