Category: Editorial
Title: Trumps Venezuela operation clears the way Part One

Trump's Venezuela operation clears the way for China and Russia to expand at will

Clears the way for China and Russia to expand at will If Xi decides to view a Taiwanese president as dangerous to Chinese interests, could he not then cite the Trump administration's security doctrine to initiate military operations in what he sees as his own backyard? When US President Donald Trump announced an "extraordinary military operation" in Venezuela on Saturday, did it sound eerily similar to the phrase "special military operation" used by Russian President Vladimir Putin in February 2022 to launch the invasion of Ukraine? What about the fact that the US forces moved swiftly to seize Nicolas Maduro and fly him to the US to face trial?

Russia, too, in the opening months of the war, mounted a rapid thrust towards Kyiv, hoping to decapitate Ukraine's leadership and collapse the government, but was pushed back. Consider also that both targeted countries are rich in strategic resources: Trump has already said that American oil companies will assume control of Venezuela's oil infrastructure, while Putin has publicly stated that Russia is ready to work with partners  -  including the US  -  to develop (read: exploit) critical minerals in Russian-occupied eastern Ukraine. If these points of comparison between the US operation in Venezuela and the Russian invasion of Ukraine feel too close, it is because they are both unilateral acts of aggression in brazen defiance of international law and post-War precedents.

Then look at the similarities in reactions. Moscow and Beijing have both expressed shock at Washington's brazenness. Russia called the US strike "an act of armed aggression against Venezuela," describing it as "deeply concerning and condemnable" -  even as, just a day earlier, a woman and a three-year-old child were killed in a Russian missile strike on Kharkiv, Ukraine's second-largest city.

China condemned "the use of force by the US against a sovereign country" in the same week it fired dozens of rockets toward Taiwan and deployed a large fleet of warships and aircraft near the island. And get this: At the post-operation press conference, Trump said he was "not thrilled with Putin" because he is "killing too many people." The hypocrisy is baffling. With its illegal military operation in Venezuela, the US has handed Russia, China, and anyone else inclined a ready-made blueprint for invading countries and removing unfriendly leaders.

By flouting established international rules, Trump has done Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping a huge favour: Both can now project themselves as defenders of sovereignty while justifying illegal acts of aggression. China claims democratically governed Taiwan as its own province and nearly all of the South China Sea, despite competing claims from Southeast Asian nations, because of its strategic value and trade routes. In the event of the People's Liberation Army launching a strike against Taipei, replicating Washington's "shock-and-awe" operation  -  targeting the central leadership using special forces and installing a friendly regime  -  Trump has already surrendered any ground the US could use to rally the world in Taiwan's defence.
