Category: Editorial
Title: Trumps latest tantrum shows USEurope Part One

Trump's latest tantrum shows US-Europe alliance is teetering on the brink

US-Europe alliance is teetering on the brink By and large, European capitals are determined to avoid being drawn into the conflict, reflecting a sentiment earlier articulated by Kaja Kallas, who stated that 'this is not Europe's war' As the US-Israel war on Iran enters its second month, the conflict is exposing and widening existing transatlantic fractures. In the latest developments, Italy has denied the use of its Sicily airbase to US aircraft carrying weapons for the Iran war. Earlier, both Spain and France refused the use of their airspace to American planes involved in the attacks.

Poland has also refused an unofficial request to deploy one of its Patriot missile systems to the Gulf. Defence Minister Władysław Kosiniak-Kamysz stressed that these systems are meant to protect Polish skies and NATO's eastern flank: "Nothing is changing, and we are not planning to relocate them." By and large, European capitals are determined to avoid being drawn into the conflict, reflecting a sentiment earlier articulated by Kaja Kallas, the European Union's foreign policy chief, who stated that "this is not Europe's war." German Chancellor Friedrich Merz echoed the broader European sentiment, stating that "the best outcome would be for this war to conclude as quickly as possible." Many European countries have also urged Israel to avoid military operations in Lebanon. They have also expressed deep concern about Israel's new "discriminatory" death penalty law, which is mainly applied to Palestinian prisoners.

Pedro Sánchez has labelled it a "step towards apartheid". Donald Trump has been sharply criticising European NATO allies, labelling them "cowards" and "paper tigers". The Trump administration has taunted Britain to reopen the Strait of Hormuz without US assistance and to "start learning how to fight" for itself, warning that America "won't be there to help you anymore" because it believes its allies failed in supporting the US.

Trump has also indicated a willingness to end the war even if the Strait of Hormuz remained closed, arguing that it should be up to European countries and Gulf states to take the lead in reopening it, as they depend on it more than the US. Apart from the UK, he has also been highly critical of France, which he has described as "very unhelpful", while warning that "the US will remember". Earlier, 28 countries  -  including more than 20 European nations  -  expressed their willingness to "contribute to appropriate efforts" to ensure safe passage through the Strait of Hormuz.

However, it seems they are waiting for hostilities to cease and for the institutionalisation of a multilateral framework. It is apparent that the US initiated this war without consulting its European allies. Its objectives have shifted with each passing day. It is now asking them to undertake tasks that even its own formidable forces have been unable to accomplish, including reopening the Strait.

In the meantime, Ukraine has signed security cooperation agreements with Saudi Arabia and Qatar and is exploring a similar arrangement with the UAE. During his recent visit to the region, Volodymyr Zelenskyy expressed interest in sharing his country's expertise in countering Russian-Iranian drones. The ongoing uncertainty about the war's duration is causing serious concern among EU policymakers about its impact on energy prices, inflation, and overall growth prospects.
