Category: Editorial
Title: Trumps Venezuela operation clears the way Part Two

Trump's Venezuela operation clears the way for China and Russia to expand at will

The PLA may employ such tactics not only against Taiwan but also against other countries where it believes that the political leadership is hostile towards Beijing in order to consolidate its "sphere of influence." Trump appears all too accommodating to allow the world's great powers to carve out their own territories. Evidence of this lies in both his words and the policies his administration pursues. The Monroe Doctrine, a foundational US foreign policy statement by former President James Monroe  -  which considered Latin America part of the US's sphere of influence  -  argued for regional dominance in the Western Hemisphere and suggested that the US should respect other powers' spheres of influence.

After the Venezuela operation, Trump openly invoked what he has termed the "Donroe Doctrine." Further, the new guiding policy of US foreign affairs, the National Security Strategy released just weeks ago, elevated the Western Hemisphere as a dominant priority and called for a military posture to pursue it. If Xi decides to view a Taiwanese president as dangerous to Chinese interests, could he not then cite the Trump administration's security doctrine to initiate military operations in what he sees as his own backyard? Trump talks of Greenland as essential to US security, and his administration openly threatens Mexico and Cuba.

Trump also said that Colombia was being "run by a sick man" and accused him of producing and selling cocaine to the US, and that military action was definitely on the table. Any realistic peace plan in Ukraine for the near future will have to concede the Donbas to Russia. China is increasingly escalating its war games across the Taiwan Strait.

The degeneration from a rules-based world to one defined by competing spheres of influence backed by the use of force is picking up pace. In Trump's world, power and the willingness to use (read: abuse) it, and not the rules, have the final say. By Saptarshi Basak The writer is deputy copy editor, Indian Express.
