Category: Editorial
Title: Trumps latest tantrum shows USEurope Part Two

Trump's latest tantrum shows US-Europe alliance is teetering on the brink

The challenge for European policymakers is that the Covid pandemic, followed by the Ukraine war and the resulting energy diversification away from Russia, has left them with very limited policy options to address the new challenges arising from the Iran conflict and the closure of the Strait. Mainly due to higher energy prices, inflationary pressures are building and may intensify further. If the war is prolonged and energy prices remain elevated, there will likely be renewed demands for subsidies similar to those provided during the 2022 energy crisis.

US Defence Secretary Pete Hegseth has now outlined a new war timeline of six to eight weeks and called on allies to "step up" in securing the Strait, emphasising that this should not be seen as the responsibility of the US alone. As average gas prices in the US reached $4 per gallon, Trump has indicated that the issue could be resolved within the next two to three weeks. On the one hand, Europe may be reluctant to step up at a time when the US appears to be already negotiating.

Moreover, many Europeans do not believe Trump's claim that "the hard part is already done". Instead, they fear that the most difficult phase may still lie ahead, potentially requiring boots on the ground. The US has acted largely in isolation, while major European allies have kept their distance. Some have condemned the war as illegal and in contravention of international law, while others have questioned the wisdom of the campaign.

Many are also concerned about the economic fallout and the potential for a new wave of refugees if Iran were to collapse. The conflict has come on the heels of the Greenland episode, further straining relations. At the same time, Europeans are taking more serious steps to reduce their dependence on the US, within the broader framework of strategic autonomy and efforts to rearm Europe.

These shifts will take time to materialise. However, trust in the alliance is eroding on both sides of the Atlantic with each passing day. Written by: Gulshan Sachdeva The writer is Jean Monnet Chair and Professor at the Centre for European Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
