Category: Editorial
Title: Trumps vanity summit with Xi Part Two

Trump's vanity summit with Xi

As was the case in Beijing, Trump once again abandoned any semblance of protocol in his cringe-worthy declarations of heartfelt admiration for his "truly great" friend's leadership skills. The hyperbole was embellished by physical demonstrations of Trump's affection. The many red carpets would put even China to shame, while the glitzy state dinner with Big Tech "broligarchs" was missing only the grand setting of a Chinese-style ballroom.

Trump attempted to compensate for that by offering Xi a personal tour of his new vanity projects in the White House: the granite helipad, the ballroom construction site, and his rogues' gallery of annotated presidential portraits. Xi was shown in a rare state of laughter when he came to Trump's crude and derisive depiction of former US President Joe Biden as an "autopen" - suggesting that the two leaders may share more personality traits than we have been led to believe. I am hardly the first to bemoan the autocratic symbolism of political leaders' vanity projects.

But there is something considerably more vulgar about Trump's approach. It consumes him as he approaches the end of his presidency. By slapping his name on monuments, programmes, and US financial instruments, he routinely violates America's sense of propriety, which has long held that naming rights are meant to honour and memorialise the deceased.

Not so for Trump, who audaciously claimed "I am the code", when apparently clashing with the ballroom architect over safety issues. Unfortunately, this has everything to do with Trump's approach to high-level meetings with America's most challenging counterpart, China. The heavy lifting of Sino-American engagement has never been needed more to address a host of global challenges.

At critical moments like this, leaders have risen to the occasion. That was not the case on September 24. There is an important asymmetry in how the two leaders see this moment in time. Xi makes constant references to a world that is "undergoing major changes unseen in a century". Trump couldn't care less.

His focus on befriending and impressing autocrats  -  not just Xi but also Russian President Vladimir Putin and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un  -  and insulting and alienating long-standing allies is part of his twisted sense that the trappings of power are power itself. America's first-ever vanity summit, while disappointing, sadly comes as no surprise. By Stephen S Roach The writer is Faculty member, Yale University, and former Chairman, Morgan Stanley Asia.
