Category: Editorial
Title: Twin buffers Fiscal rectitude and steps to Part Two

Twin buffers: Fiscal rectitude and steps to sustain growth at par for uncertain world

The government is nourishing these sectors through a coordinated set of measures of incentives, establishing dedicated industry-specific corridors, and tax relief. These, coupled with incremental steps to improve the ease of doing business and incentives in strategic areas, should contribute to a gradual revival in private investment. After the pandemic, investment growth has been driven largely by government and household spending; yet the overall investment-to-GDP ratio remains stuck at ~30 %.

Major challenges From a medium-to long-term perspective, creating jobs and skilling workers will be a major challenge, especially as technological advancements generate displacement and disruption. The government has seen the services sector as key for sustaining employment. The Budget announced skill-building measures in medical services, tourism, and hospitality, which may withstand forces of automation better.

For now, though, capital outflows and a weakening rupee have been the main blemishes on an otherwise healthy 2025 macroeconomic story. The rupee depreciated sharply in the current fiscal, becoming the worst-performing emerging market currency. Net foreign portfolio investments were negative in equities and muted in debt, and net foreign direct investment remained subdued during the first months of the fiscal.

The Economic Survey observed that "India's strongest macroeconomic performance in decades has collided with a global system that no longer rewards success with currency stability and capital inflows". Steps to draw foreign capital into fast-growing sectors such as data centres through long-term tax holiday stability are salutary. This should encourage durable investment and complement a pick-up in FDI expected from the investment announcements by global technology majors.

In addition, the Budget creates channels for non-resident Indians and foreign investors to buy Indian equities by raising the investment caps. Clearly, the ministry has preferred facilitation over tweaking capital gains. Over time, both measures are expected to boost inflows. In the mercurial global environment, the Budget has played a stabilising role in strengthening the fundamentals - fiscal discipline, targeted expenditure, and a continuing march to easing the business environment.

The recently signed trade agreements will become impactful only once they are fully implemented. Meanwhile, securing a trade deal with the US would reduce the uncertainty and punitive impact of the existing 50% tariffs, improve confidence, and encourage further inflows into India. While a lot remains pending to ease doing business and revive private investment, the government has been taking measures beyond the Budget in the form of reforms and regulatory easing.

Relentless efforts in this direction are needed to truly transform growth "potential to performance", as the Budget put it. All eyes are now on the monetary policy and the new CPI and GDP series. By Dharmakirti Joshi & Pankhuri Tandon The authors are respectively the Chief Economist and Senior Economist at Crisil Ltd.
