Category: Editorial
Title: Unprecedented ruling

Unprecedented ruling

SC order in Sandesara case raises moral hazard questions The recent ruling of the Supreme Court in the 'Sandesara case' (Hemant Hathi vs CBI) marks a first in many disturbing respects. The court has created a strange precedent  -  although it oddly asserts that this order should not be seen as a precedent-setter  -  by quashing criminal proceedings with respect to economic offences in return for a sum of money that seems both arbitrary and inadequate. The Sandesara brothers, Nitin and Chetan, will be freed of all civil and criminal proceedings against them such as loan diversion and money laundering, if they pay ₹5,100 crore by December 17.

Their businesses will face no legal taint. This is an extraordinary reprieve. The question that is rightly being asked is whether it paves the way for all fugitive economic offenders, be it Nirav Modi, Vijay Mallya or Mehul Choksi, to simply pay their way out of cases of fraud and money laundering. The court's assertion that this is a one-off case is unconvincing, because it offers virtually no reasons for saying so.

As for the Sandesara saga, the duo began their business career by setting up Sterling Biotech in Gujarat in the mid-1980s and diversified into oil over time by setting up a venture in Nigeria two decades later. In 2017, they fled the country on an Albanian passport after taking loans valued at about ₹14,500 crore. As a result, they were booked by the CBI, ED, Serious Frauds Investigation Office, under various laws such as the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, Fugitive Economic Offenders Act and the Income Tax Act.

Over time, the banks managed to get some money back, while also offering a one-time settlement of about ₹6,700 crore. Reports suggest that banks have recovered about ₹4,700 crore since 2018, which means that they would finally recover close to ₹10,000 crore. In transactional terms, this looks like a win-win for both parties, where one has bought legal peace while the banks have walked away with a 33-35 per cent haircut.

The court has argued that the lenders have been inclined to settle their dues and should be allowed to do so, while the banks will get back their money sooner rather than later. But a "full and final settlement" that obliterates all traces of wrongdoing sends a cynical message  -  that laws meant to curb economic crime can be circumvented. If the argument is that such cases are never resolved anyway, law enforcement needs to improve.

This ruling could create a situation of moral hazard. If economic offences are indeed to be settled monetarily, the price to be paid should be several multiples of the liabilities in question, with huge deterrents for criminal acts. At present there is no legal or institutional framework for such settlements; 'plea bargaining' under criminal law is not allowed in the case of serious socio-economic offences.

The apex court could have thrown light on possibilities here. It is unclear why the court says this ruling cannot be a precedent, given the court's wider role in setting legal principles.
