Category: Editorial
Title: US birthright citizenship ruling changes Part Two

US birthright citizenship ruling changes less than Indians may hope

A federal judge struck down the order in June, declaring it to be an unlawful tax that can only be imposed by Congress, but the Trump administration will appeal the decision. Beyond the issue of citizenship and visas, Indians and even Indian Americans have cause for concern. Systematic statistical data on hate-related crimes against them is not readily available, but according to a recent, reliable survey, as many as 27 per cent of Indian Americans feel that they are now the objects of discrimination while 25 per cent of permanent residents reported the same sentiment.

Since this was a nationwide sample, it does not reveal regional variations. Some anecdotal evidence, however, suggests that even in America's Silicon Valley, hostility towards people of Indian origin working in the high technology sector is growing. The rise of anti-immigrant sentiment both within the current administration and in American society is disturbing, especially since the US is a land of immigrants, barring the marginalised native American population.

Sadly, hostility to immigrants is not new in the US. In the mid-19th century, in the wake of the Irish potato blight, thousands of impoverished immigrants turned up on America's shores, and faced blatant discrimination and hostility when they landed in major urban centres such as New York City. Such attitudes persisted for years before people of Irish origin were assimilated into American life and society.

Compared to those of Irish descent, Indian Americans are a small fraction of the American population. There are nearly 40 million who are of Irish ancestry, while there are slightly over 5 million Indian Americans. Yet, as recent immigrants who are non-white and mostly of other faiths  -  as opposed to the numerically dominant Christians  -  they can easily become the object of scapegoating.

Common tropes suggest that anti-immigrant sentiment toward Indian Americans stems from the belief that they are unfairly seizing job opportunities and are abusing the visa system. Sadly, the current administration has done little to quell these fears and has instead fanned them. Though profoundly disturbing, hopefully these sentiments are only the latest version of anti-immigrant bigotry and will abate over time.

Written by: Sumit Ganguly The writer is a senior fellow and directs the Huntington Programme on US-India Relations at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University
