Category: Editorial
Title: US Supreme Courts tariff ruling changes Part Two

US Supreme Court's tariff ruling changes little

Though he may refrain from doing so before his visit to Beijing in April, he could make the announcement thereafter. In principle, other countries can challenge unfair applications of Section 232 and Section 301 tariffs at the WTO, as both the EU and China have done in the past. But these efforts will not get very far, because the WTO Appellate Body has been inquorate since 2019, owing to America's refusal to allow new judicial appointments.

Indeed, a WTO panel ruled in 2020 that the first Trump administration's 301 tariffs on China were not justified; but since the Appellate Body was not functioning, no final ruling could be issued. The US has two additional advantages over other countries: its ability to "weaponize commerce" and its ability to "commercialize weapons." The US government can leverage its position as the world's largest importing market to extract concessions from others, and it can leverage allies' security dependencies to "induce" them into investment and trade concessions. Trump's willingness to use both levers will make other governments think twice before taking the US to the WTO.

For Japan, South Korea, and parts of Europe, security considerations would likely outweigh the benefits of litigation. The legal availability of a WTO dispute-settlement process is one thing; the political willingness to use it is quite another. In the end, the Supreme Court's ruling on Trump's tariffs may modify the legal facade of US trade policy, as well as produce a brief surge of imports into the US.

But it is unlikely to reduce the overall height  -  or significantly alter the country composition  -  of US trade barriers. By Shang-Jin Wei The writer, a former chief economist at the Asian Development Bank, is Professor of Finance and Economics at Columbia Business School and Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs.
