Category: Editorial
Title: US Supreme Courts tariff ruling changes Part One

US Supreme Court's tariff ruling changes little

Trump can theoretically reimpose all the country-specific tariffs by using 'national security' and 'unfair trade practices' levers The US Supreme Court's rejection of Donald Trump's use of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) to impose country-specific tariffs has generated an explosion of headlines and rabid denunciations from the president himself. But the ruling's economic impact on other countries and world trade is likely to be limited. The IEEPA tariffs were probably already illegal under World Trade Organization rules, as they violated the principle of equal treatment.

In any case, Trump has since imposed a new across-the-board 10 per cent tariff under a different law (Section 122 of the Trade Act of 1974), which he is threatening to raise to 15 per cent (the maximum allowed). Such a response is not good news for American households and firms, but it does bring the US closer to compliance with global trading rules. In the near term, the new surcharge will create winners and losers.

Before the IEEPA ruling, trade-weighted effective tariffs were roughly 36.8 per cent on Chinese exports, 22.3 per cent on India, 21.6 per cent on Vietnam, 23.5 per cent on Indonesia, 19.4 per cent on Thailand, 14.9 per cent on Japan, 12.8 per cent on South Korea, 11.6 per cent on Malaysia, and 6.7 per cent on Singapore. But now, with the new 10 per cent Section 122 tariffs, China's effective rate will fall to about 26.9 per cent, India's to 13.9 per cent, Vietnam's to 16 per cent, Indonesia's to 16.4 per cent, and Thailand's to 14.8 per cent, while Japan and South Korea will face modest increases to 13.5 per cent and 12 per cent, respectively. Similarly, the European Union and the UK will be worse off than before the court's ruling, because they have made concessions to the US in their bilateral negotiations; but the concession from the US is in fact smaller than the removal of the IEEPA tariffs itself.

Trump's Trade Representative, Jamieson Greer, declared that the US will reconstruct the country-level tariffs through other means. Perhaps the winners and losers from the Supreme Court ruling are only temporary. Reimposing previous tariffs The Trump administration has started a process of tapping into Section 232 (on national security) and Section 301 (on unfair trade practices) of the Trade Act of 1974 to restore many elements of the previous tariff landscape.

Section 232 allows product-specific tariffs  -  such as a 25 per cent levy on steel  -  after a Commerce Department investigation, while Section 301 permits country-specific retaliation following a US Trade Representative inquiry. Because such investigations generally entail a great deal of discretion, Trump could theoretically reimpose all the country-specific tariffs that were in place before the Supreme Court's ruling. While China appears to have benefited the most from the Supreme Court decision, the relief will be temporary.

The first Trump administration already used a Section 301 investigation to justify its high tariffs on Chinese imports. The Biden administration concluded in a subsequent review that some of China's unfair trade practices had persisted and continued the Trump tariffs. Trump can simply cite the Biden administration's review as a basis to introduce new tariffs, with rates potentially higher than the IEEPA ones.
