Category: Editorial
Title: USIran negotiations still a road to nowhere Part Two

U.S.-Iran negotiations, still a road to nowhere

Israel need not oppose peace directly. It may instead seek to shape its terms in ways that make implementation impossible. Israeli military actions, such as its current invasion of Lebanon which has been expanding in scope and inflicting heavy damage, or covert operations, such as killing Iranian nuclear scientists, could potentially disrupt diplomatic momentum and eventually subvert the idea of a peace agreement.

This danger is particularly acute because Israeli and American priorities do not always perfectly coincide. Washington may increasingly value stability and de-escalation, whereas Israel may place greater emphasis on eliminating perceived long-term threats even if it entails derailing a peace agreement between Iran and the U.S. and greater regional instability.

Hardliners in the seat On the Iranian side, the principal lesson that the regime must have learned from the U.S.-Israeli attack is that nuclear ambiguity does not assure security while nuclear weapons do. The example of North Korea is ample proof of the verity of this conclusion. Moreover, all indications point to the fact that the centre of power within Iran has shifted decisively in favour of hardliners in the IRGC who will call the shots regardless of the veneer adopted by the regime for tactical purposes.

Tehran may, therefore, engage in long drawn-out negotiations about the nuclear issue but is unlikely to give up the weapons option. The aspiration may lie dormant for a period but is unlikely to disappear. Iran will give up this option only if a nuclear-weapon-free zone is created in West Asia that includes Israel, an eventuality unacceptable to Israel.

In short, while the memorandum may be signed in the coming days, as it is essential to provide Mr. Trump with an off-ramp from an unpopular war, the prospects of it translating into a lasting peace remain minimal. That would require a fundamental change of attitude in both Washington and Tehran. There are no signs that such a transformation is on the cards soon.

By Mohammed Ayoob University Distinguished Professor Emeritus of International Relations, Michigan State University, and author of 'The Many Faces of Political Islam' (2020)
