Category: Editorial
Title: We thought we understood how a galaxy forms Part Two

We thought we understood how a galaxy forms  -  and the universe just proved us wrong

Researchers Rashi Jain and Yogesh Wadadekar have peered behind a cluster of galaxies, the enormous mass of which has warped space to the extent that empty space acts like a giant lens and magnifies the galaxies located behind it. Alaknanda, patterned with readily discernible spiral arms and with a mass comparable to that of the Milky Way, seems to have existed when the universe was a fifth of its size now. Its stars appear to be only a few hundred million years old.

Its spectrum reveals the presence of a moderate amount of dust as well, which is natural, since dust grains are both by-products of star formation and necessary ingredients for forging stars. All said and done, the numbers of the mass and age of stars should be taken with a pinch of salt, because they depend on a few theoretical assumptions. At the same time, the rate at which ancient star-opulent galaxies are being discovered is certainly making theorists think afresh about how galaxies form.

By Biman Nath The writer is an astrophysicist at the Raman Research Institute, Bangalore For democracy's sake, an index for legislatures The NLI, to be published annually, proposes India's first state-wise benchmarking system to measure the productivity, transparency, and innovation of state assemblies and legislative councils. The NLI will incentivise healthy competition among states. In the past decade, the scope and complexity of governance in India have expanded at an unprecedented pace.

This demands both political commitment and deep technical understanding. State legislatures need to evolve into robust, research-driven and high-performing institutions capable of sustained scrutiny, meaningful debate and accountable lawmaking. Instead of being platforms for informed discussion and consensus-building, assemblies often find themselves paralysed by ideological divides.

This culture of disruption diminishes productivity and weakens public faith in legislative institutions. Recent reviews of state legislatures show that assemblies, on average, meet for 20-25 days a year. If our legislative assemblies are to remain temples of democracy, they must restore a sense of discipline, dialogue and dignity.

Strengthening functioning is essential to ensuring that governance keeps pace with the aspirations of a rapidly changing India. Legislative quality influences law-making, oversight of the executive, public engagement and delivery of development outcomes. Currently, there are limited ways, mostly through RTIs, by which the state legislature's quality and innovation can be measured.

There is a need for an institutional mechanism through which state legislatures can assess their functioning, identify gaps, and strengthen their institutional performance. Measuring, tracking and comparing state-level legislative performance is necessary to evaluate democratic performance within India's federal structure. Recognising this need, the National Legislative Index (NLI) seeks to provide a systematic, data-driven means of evaluating legislatures.

The NLI, to be published annually, proposes India's first state-wise benchmarking system to measure the productivity, transparency, and innovation of state assemblies and legislative councils. The NLI will incentivise healthy competition among states and accelerate the adoption of best practices (procedural, digital, and institutional). Its core objectives are to provide a comprehensive benchmarking mechanism; to distil a transparent annual score (0-100) for each legislature; to build national comparison around legislative quality and innovation; to identify gaps and challenges and thereby inform corrective reforms; to foster peer learning by highlighting inter-state disparities; to strengthen the role of the Speaker's office as a driver of institutional excellence, and to encourage institutional reforms, digital and participatory practices.
