Category: Editorial
Title: What if the Maldives disappeared Part Two

What if the Maldives disappeared?

The Caribbean is a good example. Even under a low-emissions scenario, it could lose 39% of its sandy beaches, which could translate into losing 17% of its tourism revenue by 2050. And then there's another strange business problem which we don't think of much: insurance. As the risk of floods and storms rises, insurers have to pay out more.

So they may respond by increasing premiums, reducing coverage or refusing to insure properties altogether. The US is already seeing this. Average homeowners' insurance premiums rose from $1,902 in 2020 to $2,530 in 2023. In areas facing greater disaster risks, insurance costs were much higher. And homes in these areas gained about $40,000 less in value than homes in less exposed areas.

Now, once insurance becomes too expensive or unavailable, the problem spreads. Banks may become more cautious about lending against risky properties, property values can fall and governments may eventually have to step in and pay for recovery. And when you talk about losing a land mass or an entire country, you can't just talk about the money, right?

It's also a loss of culture, heritage and identity. That's particularly unfair to small island nations that contribute less than 1% of global greenhouse gas emissions. But the problem doesn't end with the loss of land. There's also the question of what happens to a country's government or statehood, and to its people's rights, identity documents, resources, maritime and fishing rights, and nationality.

Let's say Tuvalu's physical islands disappear. It could potentially face questions about its maritime zones. Under the law of the sea, countries have maritime zones such as territorial seas and Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs), giving them rights over fishing and natural resources. Current international law doesn't provide a comprehensive rulebook for all of these situations.

So that's one of the things the UN's draft declaration tries to address. For instance, a country shouldn't automatically stop being a country simply because climate change physically damages or even removes some of its territory. Once a state has been established, it should continue to exist. But the next question is how would such a country actually function without its physical territory?

One idea is to digitise a country by preserving land records so that its government can continue functioning even without its land. Tuvalu has already begun doing this by building a digital replica of itself in the metaverse. But beyond that, countries need to tackle the problem by reducing emissions and preparing for the sea-level rise that is already locked in.

The UN's main suggestion is obvious: cut emissions by at least 60% by 2035 compared with 2019 and keep any overshoot of 1.5°C (the global warming limit countries agreed to try to stay within under the Paris Agreement) as small and short as possible. Governments may also have to plan for sea-levels rising everywhere. Some countries are already doing this by building warning systems or even raising land.

Tuvalu, for instance, has sensors along its coast to map sea-level rise and understand how much it could rise in the future. It plans to use this information to build new man-made land around three of its islands, which could temporarily protect them from storm surges and extreme floods until the end of this century. But to do all this the world will have to spend far more on adaptation funding.
