Category: Editorial
Title: What if the Maldives disappeared Part One

What if the Maldives disappeared?

In today's Finshots, we look at the UN's draft Declaration on Sea Level Rise, which explains how a country may have to function if rising seas swallow its physical land. The Story The Maldives is one of the world's most popular and preferred luxury tourist destinations. It's Asia's smallest country, with 99% water and just 1% land.

But soon, the over 2 million people visiting it on vacation every year may not be able to go there anymore. Because the Maldives may not exist at all in a few years. Yup, we're not making this up. Rising sea levels, thanks to warmer ocean surfaces and melting glaciers, could actually swallow whole island nations or coastal regions of larger countries.

And the Maldives could be at the highest risk because it's the lowest-lying country in the world, with an elevation of just 1.5 metres above sea level. This could mean that an entire nation could disappear from the world map. And along with that could disappear its contribution to the global economy, its culture and, of course, its people.

This could happen as early as 2050. Tuvalu, an archipelago of 9 small islands, for instance, could lose half of its capital city, Fongafale, to tidal flooding by 2050. Now, we know we said that the Maldives is the lowest-lying country. But Tuvalu's surrounding water levels are rising faster than in the Maldives.

It's also a tiny island country spanning just 25-26 sq. km., and a majority of its population lives in the capital. So flooding there threatens most of Tuvalu at once. And this crisis was seriously recognised by the United Nations (UN) General Assembly last week when it adopted a draft of the world's first UN Declaration on Sea Level Rise.

This declaration recognises rising sea levels as an existential threat. Because you see, when a country or region disappears because of climate change, you have to be prepared for what happens after. What should countries actually do about this? But to understand that, we'll first have to understand what's actually at risk.

To begin with, around 50 cm of sea-level rise by 2100 is already unavoidable because the oceans have absorbed much of the excess heat caused by global warming. And this will continue driving sea-level rise even if emissions fall. This means that extreme floods that occur once in 100 years could become routine.

So folks living on coastlines are at acute risk much earlier than 2100. For context, nearly 770 million people, or approximately 10% of the world's population, live in coastal areas less than 5 metres above the high-tide line. And if that isn't enough to scare you, cities such as Kolkata and Mumbai are also included, with more than 14 million people at immediate risk of losing their homes.

This undoubtedly means massive economic challenges and costs. If there's land loss and infrastructure damage, living will naturally become more expensive because displaced people will have to move elsewhere. And that will create a sort of domino effect. For instance, imagine what could happen to the world's ports.

More than 80% of global trade in goods is carried by sea. But if ports shut down because of flooding or permanent land loss, countries like India can't import or export goods normally. Factories may not get the inputs they need on time, production could slow down and businesses could lose money. Tourism, coastal transport and fishing could face similar disruptions.
