Category: Editorial
Title: What Hundred FDI means for Indian insurance Part One

What 100% FDI means for Indian insurance

The opening up of the insurance sector will lead to much needed capital infusion, especially in the non-life and health segments The recently passed Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment of Insurance Laws) Bill 2025 now completely opens up the insurance sector by allowing 100 per cent foreign direct investment (FDI) in the insurance landscape of India. This is a significant step as according to the 66th Report of Standing Committee on Finance (2023-24), insurers in India require constant long-term capital commitment. Many private insurers in India, especially in non-life and health segments, face capital constraints due to limited capacity of Indian promoters to inject repeated capital, high cost of domestic capital and long periods of initial losses before breakeven.

This hampers the ability of insurers to expand operations, invest in technology and enter underserved or high-risk segments leading to very low insurance penetration in the country. Initial reservations were attributed to protect its nascent domestic industry and safeguard national savings. Prior to liberalization, this also helped ensure control over critical financial resources and prevent foreign domination.

However, the insurance sector has come a long way since then. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has experienced a significant and progressive deregulation, with the investment cap steadily increasing over time and now standing at a proposal of 100 per cent. Path to reform It started with opening up of the sector back in August 2000 trying to bring in more players from the private sector in the industry and ending the monopoly of the state-owned Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) and General Insurance Corporation (GIC).

It opened the market in August 2000 allowing foreign companies an ownership of up to 26 per cent. Through an amendment in 2015 to the Insurance Act 1938, ownership was raised to 49 per cent. Further in 2021, through another amendment, the cap was further raised to 74 per cent. Now, Further opening up of the insurance sector definitely has potential to improve the performance of the Indian insurance landscape.

First, capital scarcity is a structural constraint, impeding the growth of insurers. Insurers must maintain high solvency margins, invest in long-term assets, and absorb underwriting risks over decades in order to expand, for which they require capital. Domestic promoters often lack the incentive to invest in a long-gestation business such as insurance.

FDI has the potential to augment long-term capital. Second, foreign insurers bring more than just capital to the table. They bring new and innovative risk pricing and underwriting models and advanced actuarial science. This leads to product innovation and diversification of options for Indian consumers.

Third, the returns for insurers planning to venture to the underserved populations require large upfront investments with uncertain short-term returns. Foreign investors, with diversified global portfolios, are better positioned to absorb these initial losses and finance long-term market creation, something domestic investors may be reluctant to do. Lastly, public sector dominance has ensured stability in this sector but it has also reduced competitive pressure, slowed innovation and crowded out private investment.

Higher FDI is implicitly seen as a way to level the playing field, strengthen private players, and deepen competition without dismantling public sector insurers. Increased foreign direct investment in insurance has led to improved market penetration, innovative underwriting and risk pricing models, and diverse products in several countries. China has moved toward 100 per cent foreign ownership in insurance businesses, allowing companies like Chubb and Manulife to acquire full ownership of local insurance firms.
