Category: Editorial
Title: What Hundred FDI means for Indian insurance Part Two

What 100% FDI means for Indian insurance

Similarly countries like Canada, Australia and Brazil have greatly relaxed foreign ownership restrictions. Following the move toward 100 per cent FDI, global insurer Generali Group announced plans to inject additional capital into its Indian joint venture to expand operations. This is a direct example of how full ownership can unlock new investment commitments that were limited under previous caps.

The challenges However, opening up the insurance sector also comes with certain challenges that need to be addressed. First, the supposed expertise of foreign insurers is doubtful, evidenced by incidents like the global financial crisis. A 2014 report by the Korea Finance Consumer Federation showed that foreign life insurance companies in South Korea were responsible for a disproportionately high share of financial fraud.

Allowing FDI in India's insurance sector therefore risks exposing our financial markets to the perilous activities of foreign firms, especially as their regulation remains debated in advanced nations. Second, the foreign firms would need to adapt to local distribution models such as India's bancassurance model, which might pose a challenge. Further, they would have to diversify products to cater to the low-income segment as well.

Third, a significant portion of profits flow out of the host country due to FDI, reducing long-term local economic benefits. Also, complete ownership in firms can reduce local decision making powers. Lastly, aggressive policies of foreign insurers might lead to market volatility. The move by the government to allow 100 per cent FDI in this sector is a confident step, showing the government's belief in the resilience of India's insurance ecosystem.

The reforms need to be undertaken with an iron hand to ensure proper regulatory oversight, for which the Bill empowers IRDAI to disgorge wrongful gains from insurers and intermediaries by raising the penalty from ₹1 crore to ₹10 crore. If implemented properly, this move has the potential to increase capital investment, enhance the existing product segment and expand market coverage. By Rouhin Deb & Ananya Dubey Deb is Chief Economist, Chief Minister's Secretariat, Government of Assam; Dubey is Mukherjee Fellow, Policy Politic & Governance Foundation
