Category: Editorial
Title: Where does the IndiaUS trade deal stand Part Two

Where does the India-U.S. trade deal stand? | Explained

On February 24 imposed a 126% tariff on the import of solar modules from India after a 'preliminary' finding that subsidised exports from India were hurting U.S. solar firms. What about the impact on other trade deals? The European Union, which has already signed a trade deal with the U.S., was very vocal about what it expected following the Supreme Court judgment.

"The European Commission requests full clarity on the steps the U.S. intends to take following the recent Supreme Court ruling on the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA)," the Commission said in a statement. "The current situation is not conducive to delivering 'fair, balanced, and mutually beneficial' transatlantic trade and investment, as agreed to by both sides and spelled out in the EU-U.S.

Joint Statement of August 2025." Japanese officials, too, were vocal about the deal, saying that since Japan's deal with the U.S. focussed on automobile tariffs that were not affected by the Supreme Court judgment, they were not keen to revisit the deal. The Australian trade minister said that the U.S.

must honour the free trade agreement signed between the two countries and allow duty-free imports of Australian goods into the U.S., since Australia was holding up its end by allowing duty-free imports of U.S. goods. How has India reacted? In various interviews and press conferences, Mr. Goyal had said the interim agreement was set to be formally signed by the middle of March, and could be implemented by early April.

These statements, however, were made before the Supreme Court's ruling. In response to the ruling, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry issued a relatively anodyne statement compared to statements made by other countries and groupings. "We have noted the U.S. Supreme Court judgment on tariffs yesterday," the statement said, adding, "President Trump has also addressed a press conference in that regard.

Some steps have been announced by the U.S. Administration. We are studying all these developments for their implications." The Indian team was meant to be in Washington on February 23-25 to finalise the contours of the interim agreement so that it could be signed in mid-March. While not mentioning the deal in the official statement, sources in India's Ministry of Commerce and Industry said that "the two sides are of the view that the proposed visit of the Indian chief negotiator and the team be scheduled after each side has had the time to evaluate the latest developments and its implications".

In other words, the visit to the U.S. was postponed indefinitely. However, on the other hand, Mr. Goyal hosted both Mr. Lutnick and U.S. Ambassador to India Sergio Gor in New Delhi on February 26 for what turned out to be a "fruitful" meeting, in Mr. Goyal's words. A new date for an official meeting of negotiators is yet to be announced.

At the moment, a deal is more important to the U.S. than India because India can reduce its tariffs on U.S. goods only once a deal is signed. At the same time, the U.S. tariff threat that had been looming over issues like Russian oil and buying more U.S. goods has been removed for the time being. Has the U.S.

changed its stance? Regarding trade deals, the Trump Administration has been clear: nothing changes. Mr. Trump warned countries that he had signed deals with to honour them and not "play games", or risk facing higher tariffs. "Any Country that wants to 'play games' with the ridiculous supreme court decision, especially those that have 'Ripped Off' the U.S.A.
