Category: Editorial
Title: Why are FPIs exiting Part Two

Why are FPIs exiting?

To the US, which has witnessed a general upward movement. It must be noted that ever since the central banks have been pursuing quantitative tightening, the quantum of investible funds has come down considerably. Hence, funds are being reallocated as investors search for opportunities in a wider set of markets.

Coming to the war, India's market performance could be making FPIs cautious. Rupee Volatility The high dependence on imported crude oil makes the trade balance jittery. While real growth is less of a concern, the issue with rupee depreciation is a consideration. The fact that the rupee is moving down lowers purchases and enhances sales, leading to net outflows.

This in turn, feeds back to the currency strength as the rupee tends to be affected perversely, thus justifying the view that real returns would be weak. This is a tough nut to crack from the policy point of view. How about debt? Ever since the war began, the bond markets have been in a different mood.

Higher crude prices cause higher inflation across the world. This means that interest rates will no longer be lowered. Kevin Warsh's appointment as chairman of the Federal Reserve was supposed to be associated with lowering of rates, which is what Donald Trump wanted. The last policy was cautious on rates.

Now there is talk of rates being increased rather than lowered as inflation increases. This has pushed up bond yields. While Indian bond yields too have climbed up to cross 7% for 10 years' maturity, there is a case of investors weighing the net return where the currency decline comes into play. Therefore, FPIs will continue to be unpredictable in the next few months.

They cannot be considered as a source of long-term capital when working out the options for closing the current account deficit gap. As long as they do not accelerate their withdrawal, it could be steady news. But the declining rupee is definitely a consideration for them as the real value gets affected.

Written by Madan Sabnavis Madan Sabnavis is chief economist, Bank of Baroda
