Category: Editorial
Title: Why digital vigilantism is not the problem Part Two

Why 'digital vigilantism' is not the problem

Social media redressal There have been several instances of unwarranted behaviours during air travel. Case in point is the incident that occurred in November 2022, when a man urinated on a woman. The airlines was slow to act upon the complaint and it was only once details were made public that the airlines took action against the individual.

The fundamental issue, therefore, is to have adequate processes at all levels so that a timely redress can be carried out. For instance, if airlines had proper systems in the form of strict no-fly lists, one may not have to resort to social media amplification. To draw a parallel between consumer services, when a consumer has an unpleasant experience, they have the right to take to social media to express their displeasure.

The outcome is two-pronged  -  either the service provider will respond with their defence or apologise for the bad experience. This helps other consumers make informed choices before availing the same service. Moreover, in consumer services there are adequate systems and processes that exist before a person takes to social media to express displeasure.

Customer grievance teams are often prompt to act on complaints because of the fear of reputational and financial losses. However, justice systems and processes that help to achieve real, legal justice are significantly different. They are not prompt and often refuse to act on complaints of harassment, leaving victims with no choice but to take to other channels to amplify their grievances.

The issue therefore, is not of freedom of expression versus public shaming but the fact that in the face of abject failure of processes, people are left with no choice but to use social media as a tool to achieve justice. To avoid "digital vigilantism", a collective strengthening of processes and faith in these processes is crucial. By Prachi Dutta Corporate lawyer licensed in New York and India, advises companies and funds, and serves as an Adjunct Professor at Jindal Global Law School and Shiv Nadar University
