Category: Editorial
Title: Womens empowerment schools and beyond Part One

Women's empowerment  -  schools and beyond

Women's education, voice, agency and collectives make a difference to gender gaps The National Family Health Survey (2023-24) Fact Sheets evoke reflection. Read with the five earlier Surveys starting from 1992-93, they reflect a tale of transformation and persistent challenges as well. We decided to look at the findings from the lens of gender empowerment, which encompasses opportunities for vibrant women's collectives, access to quality education, having a voice and agency to take decisions, access to economic activity and diversified livelihoods.

The last decade and a half have seen rural livelihood mission collectives expand to a 100 million women. While studies indicate persistence of patriarchy in modified forms, it is also true that a lot has changed in the lives of women on account of the collectives. Access to credit, low wage employment and low profit nano enterprises, access to animal resources, adolescent girls in secondary education, women in farm and non-farm livelihoods, better access to reproductive and child health, clean water and sanitation, cash transfers, free travel in some States, are all making a difference to the lives of women.

Interestingly, the rural livelihood mission has managed to capture the imagination of all political parties who are vying with each other to do more for women as they are the largest constituency. Inter-State variations We decided to look at NFHS-6 Fact Sheets across States on indicators like 6+ females ever attended school, 2-4 years in pre-school, 10 years of schooling for 15-49-year-old males and females and stunting among under 5-year-old children. These were purposively selected as they reveal a lot on the role that these indicators play in the lives of women and development.

To understand the inter-State variations better, we looked at the better (Sikkim, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Goa, Himachal Pradesh), the aspiring (Bihar, UP, MP, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh) and a few high on per capita income States but without commensurate social development indicators (Haryana, Gujarat, Telangana, Maharashtra and Karnataka) to understand how gender empowerment matters to real development. As is well known, 69.23 per cent of 6+ rural females had never been enrolled in primary education at the time of the 42nd Round National Sample Survey (1986- 87). With 73.7 per cent of 6+ females ever attended school in 2023-24, surely a lot has changed; Kerala reports 96.6 per cent.

Bihar and Rajasthan have not been able to shed this historical disadvantage in girls' education as they are at 64 per cent. Surprisingly, in Telangana, only 60.2 per cent of the 6+ females have ever attended school. Despite high per capita income, the State has major challenges in girls' education. The data on men and women with 10 or more years of schooling among the 15- 49 population is equally insightful.

Kerala tops with 86.6 per cent females against 82.1 per cent males. Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Gujarat are below 40 per cent on this indicator. Telangana reports a 13.9 per cent gender gap on the indicators for 10 years of schooling, pointing out how it needs to do much more to bridge the gender gap.

Haryana, even though very high on per capita income, reports a high 9.2 per cent gender gap on 10 years of schooling. Clearly, gender unequal relationships are a cause of concern to development and well-being. Stunting among children Gender inequalities in States reflect strongly in the level of stunting among children under age five.
