Category: Editorial
Title: Womens empowerment schools and beyond Part Two

Women's empowerment  -  schools and beyond

As is to be expected, the States in the better category are all below the national average of stunting at 29.3 per cent, the aspiring States are all above the national average, but the surprising performance is some of the States like Haryana, Telangana, Gujarat, and to some extent even Maharashtra and Karnataka, where the figures are sobering in comparison to their economic performance. These States must reduce the gender gap in 10 years of schooling to make a dent on stunting among children, as a correlation has been observed. Women's education, empowerment, voice, agency and collectives make a difference to gender gaps over time, and we need to invest in such processes.

It is also true that some regions in these States have special challenges. States like Sikkim, Meghalaya, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar have made significant progress in reducing stunting in recent years through collaborative governance using women's collectives. The Panchayati Raj Institutions-Self-Help Group (PRI-SHG) framework has facilitated a more gender sensitive approach to development.

The less than 50 per cent coverage of 2-4-year-olds in pre-school shows that the Integrated Child Development Services scheme is still far from achieving universal coverage. It is higher than the national average in the better States, indicating the important role that pre-school education plays in the holistic development of a child. It is for this reason that the new National Education Policy 2020 has rightly emphasised the importance of pre-school education.

To fulfil the aspiration of the National Education Policy, a lot more will need to be done. The army of women caregivers like Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs), Aanganwadi workers and helpers have all played a key role in meeting the needs of the 0-6-year-old children. However, low compensation to these women workers at the last mile, compromises our ability to provide high-quality day-care centres and crèches for children of working women.

This has implications for female labour force participation rates. We need to revisit the governance and compensation framework of the last mile, locally resident women workers, to ensure high-quality care services that are needed for quality human capital, productivity and economic growth. The NFHS-6 also highlights better performance of States that have invested in devolution, decentralised community action.

PRI-SHG partnerships, girls' education, and an overall framework of collaborative governance and gender empowerment. Women's collectives, voice, agency and empowerment is the pathway to inclusive growth and well-being. That is the lesson from the NFHS- 6 data. By Amarjeet Sinha & Shagun Suryam Sinha and Suryam work at the Centre for Social and Economic Progress.

Views are personal
