VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Fuelled 
A. smartness 
2. Shrewdness 
B. powered 
3. Chafe 
C. discussed 
4.Deliberated 
D. disagreement 
5. Dissent 
E. irritate 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- A 
3- E 
4- C 
5- D 

            Notional security: On the U.S.'s National Security Strategy 
The U.S. is in pursuit of global dominance and isolationism simultaneously 
The U.S. has released its first National Security Strategy (NSS) under the Trump second term, 
a document described as a road map to "ensure that America remains the world's strongest, 
richest, most powerful, and most successful country for decades to come". Washington has 
identified five top foreign policy priorities. These include the notion that the era of mass 
migration has ended, that core rights and liberties including the freedom of speech and 
religion need to be protected more than ever before, that the "days of the U.S. propping up the entire 
world order like Atlas are over", that the White House sees it as imperative to double down on 
shepherding peace deals across the world as a means to solidify U.S. influence abroad, and that 
economic security will be accorded highest importance in foreign policy. For the last pillar of national 
security, especially, the thrust of concerted foreign policy actions for the remainder of the second Trump 
administration will entail efforts towards achieving balanced trade, securing access to critical supply 
chains and materials, reindustrialization of the U.S. economy, boosting American defence infrastructure, 
energy dominance, and supporting Wall Street to leverage the "dynamic free market system and our 
leadership in digital finance and innovation" worldwide. 
While the grandiose terms of U.S. foreign policy priorities are unsurprising in their broad emphasis, 
other than, perhaps, the unrelenting subtext of eternal, unquestioned American exceptionalism, it is the 
broadside against European allies that is most troubling for the risk that it poses to regional stability 
across the continent. The NSS not only takes a patronizing tone on Europe facing the "stark prospect of 
civilizational erasure" owing to its purported economic decline, but it also faults Germany and EU 
countries with "unstable minority governments" whose policy actions do not apparently match their stated 
desire for peace in the context of Russia's war in Ukraine. Little wonder that Germany's Foreign Minister 
Johann Wadephul retorted that in the context of Germany, he did not believe that "questions of freedom 
of expression or the organisation of our free societies" belonged in the U.S. NSS and that his country did 
not need "outside advice". While the NSS is a signpost to guide U.S. diplomats towards a united vision 
for Washington-defined foreign policy goals, its latest version has set the cat among pigeons so far as 
anxieties around NATO's strength are concerned. If, as the NSS says, the U.S. intends to push a 
"burden-sharing network" to force all its allies to assume responsibility for stability in their regions, it 
might end up bolstering the sense of impunity with which autocrats worldwide flout territorial and human 
rights norms in their quest for power. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Dormant 
A. integration 
2. Unification 
B. crack 
3. Fissure 
C. division 
4. Salutation 
D. inactive 
5. Partition 
E. greeting 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- B 
4- E 
5- C 

            AI must pay: On the DPIIT working paper on AI and Copyright Issues 
The working paper on AI and Copyright Issues is a good start 
The rapid strides being made by LLMs in terms of quality, depth of information and 
sophistication of reasoning, are fuelled by two major factors. The first is iterative 
advancements in applied machine learning techniques, which continuously improve the 
performance of LLMs. The second is growing access to text, data and multimedia used in 
training these models. AI firms have argued that information on the Internet should be freely 
usable for such training, even if reproduction and similar acts of syndication by any non-AI entity would 
be subject to a licence fee and consent by the content producer. This has led to a fierce debate that pits 
the interests of AI hyperscalers and developers against content producers (news, entertainment and 
book publishing, to name a few). In this light, the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade's working paper on AI and Copyright Issues' proposal is a welcome step towards a solution where 
content providers are remunerated, without having a system that could put India's AI ecosystem at a 
disadvantage. 
The paper's solution boils down to a mandatory licensing framework, which would allow AI data scraping 
tools to limitlessly scrape public information from the Internet, but would ensure that a non-profit 
copyright society-like body would collect payments from AI developers on the basis of revenue accrued 
to them through the benefits of training their models on Indian content producers' data. The reasoning is 
partly driven by practical shrewdness on the drafting committee's part, which rightly reasons that opting 
out of data scraping, and enforcing this when AI developers ignore their wishes, is not practical for every 
content producer. The other driver is a belief in data processing as a right for AI models, seeing as they 
do not usually reproduce content they are trained on, but synthesise fresh outputs. There are issues with 
how the royalty amount would be decided - small publishers who put in effort and investment in their 
work may chafe at receiving as much remuneration a piece as a big media house putting out hundreds 
of articles a day. But a system for remuneration is urgent, even if flawed. Lawsuits pitting AI firms 
against the publishers of the content they train models on are ongoing, and no uniform judicial thinking 
has materialized on the subject. The committee correctly notes that waiting for the outcome of any given 
litigation is unwise. The white paper - and a dissent by tech industry representatives - is a promising 
gesture towards a collaborative framework. The government needs to support this. A flawed system can 
be deliberated in the courts; the absence of one is a gift to AI firms in their ongoing disruption of the 
media and net landscape. 
T