VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct 
meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Menace 
A. shameless 
2. Brazen 
B. demolish 
3. Dismantle 
C. threat 
4. Proliferating 
D. compel 
5. Coerce 
E. expanding 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- B 
4- E 
5- D 

            Death on the move: On India's disgraceful record in fatal road accidents 
Road accidents are not resulting in overhaul of infrastructure and licensing 
The highway accident on November 3, 2025 that claimed 19 lives at Chevella near Hyderabad 
was far too routine to change India's disgraceful record in fatal road accidents. The driver of 
a gravel-laden truck apparently swerved to avoid a pothole and rammed into a bus. There 
were no dividers, no streetlights and no signages on that stretch of National Highway 163. 
India's roads are a major public hazard. Pedestrians, bus riders and two-wheeler motorists 
constitute the majority of the over 400 people who die on India's roads on average, the equivalent to a 
full transcontinental flight going down. Flight disasters invite scrutiny, multi-agency probes and quick 
remedial actions but road accident deaths that mostly involve poorer folk trigger perfunctory probes 
and glacial change in rules, if any. Government documents identify human error as the most common 
cause but deeper reasons - vehicular and infrastructural - are unaddressed. 
In India, the road test for getting a driving licence examines whether the person is able to handle a 
vehicle of certain specification, largely a skill test, rather than one of his knowledge and execution of safe 
driving practices. No safety training is mandated. Most accidents are collisions from the back - 
whereas exemplar driving tests in other countries filter out tailgating tendencies and arbitrary lane 
changing. The system of certifying and monitoring drivers and vehicles is broken and corrupt. For nearly 
all Indians, navigating RTOs is unpleasant. The SaveLIFE Foundation advocates License Seva Kendras 
- on the lines of Passport Seva Kendras - so that they are transparent, digitised, and ensure good 
driver skills and safety awareness. One in five accidents are head-on collisions, which have happened 
even on four-lane highways, indicating wrong-side driving and the state of road dividers. In general, 
national highways need to adhere to Indian Roads Congress guidelines but States have made no 
mandates as required by the Motor Vehicles Act. There are potholes, dangerous curves, drainage 
systems, bridge parapets and concrete objects, but no crash barriers or energy absorbers. Collision-risk 
warning devices are relatively inexpensive and can be mandated on commercial vehicles. Better 
pedestrian infrastructure alone can prevent many fatalities. In Hyderabad, a community health-care 
centre was available for immediate treatment and a government hospital was not far away. But that is 
often not the case elsewhere. In States such as Bihar, fatality rates are double because of inadequate 
trauma care infrastructure. An overhaul of the road transport system is an urgent requirement in India. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct 
meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Derail 
A. sabotage 
2. Scuttle 
B. thoughtful 
3. Deliberative 
C. evident 
4. Palpable 
D. distract 
5. Nebulous 
E. unclear 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- A 
3- B 
4- C 
5- E 

            Fishing troubles: On India, Sri Lanka, the Palk Bay fishing issue 
The arrest of 14 Tamil Nadu fishermen by the Sri Lankan Navy on November 9, 2025 for 
allegedly crossing the International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL) and entering Sri Lankan 
waters could be viewed by some as yet another event statistically. However, the incident 
forms part of the painful legacy of the Palk Bay dispute, which India and Sri Lanka have still 
not been able to resolve despite the livelihood of fishing communities on either side being at 
stake. So far, 128 fishermen from Tamil Nadu, including those apprehended in 2024, and their boats, 
remain under Sri Lankan custody, as stated in Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M.K. Stalin's recent letter to 
External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar. This is a complex and chronic problem. As far as the fishermen 
of Tamil Nadu are concerned, they struggle to access traditional fishing waters, even if this means going 
beyond the IMBL. The duration and cost of each voyage are of not much concern to the fishermen and 
their employers, who own fishing vessels, as this is a rapid operation. Leaving aside the high possibility 
of action by Sri Lanka, the swiftness with which each voyage is carried out is what drives fishermen in 
the name of "tradition". This involves bottom trawling which damages coral beds, shrimp habitats, and 
depletes fish stocks. The fishermen of the Northern Province, who have still to overcome the trauma of 
the civil war, would not have a problem even if the Tamil Nadu fishermen cross the IMBL, but follow 
traditional fishing methods and use small boats. What hurts them more is the use of trawlers which 
destroy their marine resources. 
The Joint Working Group on Fisheries met in Colombo on October 29, 2024. In March this year, 
fishermen leaders from Rameswaram in Tamil Nadu visited Sri Lanka to hold discussion with their 
counterparts but there was no official sanction for the initiative of the two fishing communities. The 
Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna-led National People's Power regime, which has been in office for about a 
year, has not yet shown any urgency in resolving the dispute, except taking a strident position. Experts 
have suggested a number of measures to resolve the issue. Apart from learning from the experience of 
the EU Baltic countries and equitable quotas to conserve the living resources, India and Sri Lanka can 
set up a research station in the Palk Bay region for experiments to increase living resources and 
safeguard the marine environment. To boost the confidence of the fishermen of the Northern Province, 
New Delhi should go the extra mile by launching a liberal assistance scheme to prepare them to move 
out of bottom trawling and take to deep sea fishing, apart from imposing a ban on the pernicious 
practice eventually. 
T