Turning tides: On Pakistan-Afghanistan tensions 
Pakistan cannot ensure internal security by bombing Afghanistan 
hen the Taliban recaptured Kabul in August 2021, after two decades of insurgency, 
Pakistan viewed it as a tactical victory. Imran Khan, then Prime Minister, famously 
said the Afghans had "broken the shackles of slavery". But the Taliban's return 
emboldened the Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP), which is organizationally distinct 
from, yet ideologically aligned with, the Afghan Taliban. Over four years, Pakistan, 
particularly the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province bordering Afghanistan, has seen a dramatic surge in 
militant attacks. This year alone, at least 2,414 people were killed in militancy-related violence in 
Pakistan, according to an Islamabad-based think tank. Pakistan blames the Afghan Taliban for sheltering 
the TTP, better known as the Pakistani Taliban, and tensions escalated into full-scale cross-border 
clashes. On October 9, 2025, while Taliban Foreign Minister Amir Khan Muttaqi was visiting India, 
Pakistan carried out air strikes in Kabul, apparently targeting the TTP. These strikes triggered a week of 
cross-border attacks that left dozens dead, before a fragile Qatar-brokered ceasefire took effect. 
When the Afghan Taliban were waging an insurgency, Pakistan offered them refuge and support. 
Pakistan's military establishment expected the Taliban to remain loyal once in power. But when the 
Taliban took over the reins in Afghanistan, the old patron-client relationship was replaced by state-to-
state ties, with deep structural contradictions. The Pakistani Taliban, which oppose the merger of 
Pakistan's tribal areas with Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, want their version of a strict Islamic code to be 
enforced and demand the release of TTP prisoners, drew inspiration from the Afghan Taliban's triumph. 
The Durand Line, the colonial-era border, re-emerged as another flashpoint as Kabul has never 
recognised it. Besides, Pakistan's decision to deport thousands of Afghan refugees strained ties 
further. What likely provoked the Pakistani establishment even more was India's diplomatic outreach to 
the Taliban. By carrying out air strikes on Kabul in response to militant attacks, Pakistan appears to be 
setting a new precedent - holding Kabul directly accountable for cross-border militant attacks - in a 
move reminiscent of India's doctrine of responding to terrorism with overwhelming force against 
Pakistan. Yet, the security crisis in Pakistan now engulfing its tribal areas is largely of its own making. 
For decades, it has followed a contradictory policy - fighting terrorism while harbouring terrorist/militant 
groups that were fighting its neighbouring countries. It backed the Taliban for over two decades, hoping 
that a Taliban-controlled Kabul would offer it strategic depth. That strategy has now backfired. If Pakistan 
believes that it can restore internal security by bombing Afghanistan, it is mistaken. Prolonged conflict 
and chaos will only deepen instability and strengthen insurgency. 
W


Hands-off approach: On the Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar awards 
Scientists are the best judges of excellence in science 
The government has announced a list of 24 individual scientists and a team as recipients of 
the second edition of the Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar (RVP) awards, conferred by the Centre 
for scientific achievement. As in 2024, this year too has four broad categories: the Vigyan 
Ratna, Vigyan Shri, Vigyan Yuva-Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar award and Vigyan team award. 
The Vigyan Ratna and Vigyan Shri are for scientists who have made distinguished 
contributions over their lifetime, and recent distinguished contributions respectively. The Yuva is for 
individuals under 45 and the final one for a team endeavour in technology development. 
In theory, the total number of awards, under all categories, is capped at 56; though this year, there are 
fewer than the 33 awarded last year. The award announcement has been delayed by several months, 
but this could indicate greater scrutiny of potential awardees. It is important to note that unlike earlier 
editions of national science awards, for instance the Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar (SSB) awards, there is no 
cash component given for the RVP, to align with the spirit of the Padma awards. But scrutiny is a 
double-edged sword. Last year, it emerged that some scientists were told about being recipients, only to 
be informed later that their names had been dropped. Several prominent scientists across India wrote to 
the Office of the Principal Scientific Adviser (PSA), demanding transparency in the process of award 
selection. There were concerns that factors other than scientific merit - for instance, criticism of 
government policy and political ideology - may have played a role. The PSA has not categorically 
responded to these demands except to point out that the selection committee, called the Rashtriya 
Vigyan Puraskar Committee (chaired by the PSA and which includes Secretaries of Ministries and 
members of scientific academies), "recommended" awardees to the Minister of Science and Technology. 
It is not explicit whether the Minister can overturn a recommendation made by the committee. The RVP 
awards were instituted after the Ministry of Home Affairs and heads of science departments concluded in 
2022 that there were too many awards being given out by individual scientific departments and, hence, 
necessary to trim them and raise their 'stature' to national awards. While awards such as the SSB 
awards too were finalised in consultation with the Science Minister, the centralization and the explicit 
attempt to make the RVP 'Padma-like', means that they appear far more politicized than they ought to 
be. If the aim of the RVP is to increase 'stature', the government must be seen to have an explicitly 
hands-off approach and let scientists judge the excellence of their peers. 
T