Shifting sands: On the defence agreement between Saudi Arabia, Pakistan 
India's West Asia policy must maintain a strategic balance 
The signing of a mutual defence agreement between Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, which 
declares that "any aggression ... shall be considered an aggression against both", is a 
moment of consequence for both countries as well as for West and South Asia. Saudi Arabia, 
the custodian of Islam's two holiest mosques, and Pakistan, the Islamic world's only nuclear 
power, have always enjoyed a special relationship. Pakistan has trained Saudi forces for 
decades, while the kingdom has provided generous financial assistance, including help for 
Islamabad's nuclear programme. With the agreement, this partnership has now been 
institutionalized. Yet, its timing, announced a week after Israel bombed Qatar, underlines the shifting 
sands in the Persian Gulf's security landscape. For decades, its monarchies relied on solid security 
guarantees from the U.S. But with the U.S. focus shifting away from West Asia, the durability of the old 
framework has come into question. When Saudi oil installations were attacked by Iranian allies in 2019, 
the U.S. did nothing. Israel's attack on Qatar, which hosts America's largest base in West Asia, seems 
to have expedited the realignment. 
In the Abraham Accords, the U.S. tried to bring the Arab monarchies and Israel closer to build a common 
front against Iran. Four Arab countries, including the UAE, signed up, and Saudi Arabia was expected to 
follow. But the Hamas attack of October 7, 2023 and Israel's Gaza war, which has spilled into other 
countries, have derailed the process. With the Pakistan agreement, Saudi Arabia is sending a clear 
signal to Washington and Tel Aviv that it is diversifying its security alliances. For Pakistan, which 
desperately needs Saudi financial assistance, closer defence ties at a time when Gulf monarchies are 
rattled by Israel's unchecked militarism, are an opportunity to present itself as a security provider. For 
India, which fought with Pakistan in May, the agreement could complicate its manoeuvres in West Asia. 
As India has taken a pro-Israel tilt, Arab monarchies seem to be hedging their bets, even if that means 
overlooking India's concerns. Yet, it is not clear whether the agreement offers Pakistan's nuclear 
umbrella to Saudi Arabia or an immediate Saudi response if Pakistan comes under attack. Risks of 
entrapment come with the agreement: Pakistan could be dragged into West Asia's polycrisis or Saudi 
Arabia could be pulled into the tensions in South and Central Asia. India must prepare for rapid changes 
in West Asia's security order. It might be tempted to double down on its tilt towards an isolated, 
dangerous Israel. That would be a mistake. Instead, India's long-term focus should be on promoting 
stability in the region, and maintaining a strategic balance among all pillars of its West Asia policy.


Troubled transition: On the Nepal protests and after 
Interim government in Nepal must resist illegitimate demands 
fter violent protests that left 74 dead, Nepal's elected government has fallen, with its 
Parliament dissolved and former jurist Sushila Karkileading an interim government until the 
2026 elections. While the Gen Z protesters had legitimate grievances including poor 
governance, entrenched corruption and intolerance of critical views, seen in the ousted 
CPN-UML-led government's banning of 23 social media websites - the transition itself was 
blatantly unconstitutional, violating Article 76 of Nepal's 2015 Constitution which permits 
dissolution only after failed Prime Minister appointments. Yet, considering the exigent 
circumstances, there is little purchase for judicial review of the steps taken last week. Notably, the 
President did not dissolve the upper house, the National Assembly. More troubling were the protesters' 
egregious actions which included burning Parliament and the Supreme Court (destroying vital 
documents). Nepal is expected to suffer severe economic losses besides governance issues due to the 
destruction of property and documents. The targeting of democratic institutions suggests an assault on 
Nepal's post-Constitutional order - institutions established after the painstaking constitution-writing 
process that followed the much-needed ending of a decade-long civil war in 2006, overcoming an 
anachronistic and discredited monarchy and which included marginalized sections beyond Kathmandu 
valley's power structures - even if there was half-hearted or ineffective implementation of the 
Constitution's spirit and letter. 
The interim government must bring the criminals to justice as any inaction will lead to a normalization of 
violence threatening all institutions that were set up to fulfil the promises of deeper democratization and 
Nepal's transformation into a republic. Even if Gen Z protesters claim that impostors carried out the 
violence, their continued reliance on online forums, such as Discord, for decision-making reveals 
immaturity and an unrepresentative nature. The reliance on online forums, which feature anonymity, 
frivolity and impersonation, and the fact that there is no guarantee that these views are representative 
of the many marginalized groups suggest that giving into the demands from these unaccountable 
groups uncritically could be hazardous. The failures of mainstream leaders - the K.P. Sharma Oli-
Sher Bahadur Deuba-Pushpa Kamal Dahal troika and their coteries - cannot justify discrediting 
democracy or the polity itself, as some protesters have made it out to be, echoing anti-social and 
destructive pro-monarchic elements. One outcome is that the entrenched leadership of mainstream 
parties could be compelled by party members to give way to fresh blood. Meanwhile, the interim 
government must protect Nepal's institutions and constitutional achievements while building the stage for 
free and fair elections - this is the surest path to safeguarding the promise of a democratic, plural and 
republican "Naya Nepal".