VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Heft 
A. apart from 
2. Barring 
B. weight 
3. Disruption 
C. weaken 
4. Embark 
D. interruption 
5. Dilute 
E. commence 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- A 
3- D 
4- E 
5- C 
Women's world: On India's victory in the World Cup 
The World Cup win came after a long struggle on and off the field 

            t the midnight hour on a magical Sunday, Harmanpreet Kaur and her incredible women 
made their tryst with destiny. India was finally crowned world champions in women's 
cricket. It was a journey marked by a long history of angst and joy, shaped by the sweat and 
dreams of pioneers such as Shantha Rangaswamy, Diana Edulji, Mithali Raj, and Jhulan 
Goswami. In a high-stakes final befitting an ICC World Cup, India prevailed over South 
Africa by 52 runs at Navi Mumbai's D.Y. Patil Stadium, which turned into a teeming mass of 
raucous energy. This moment is as epochal as it was for Kapil Dev and his men in 1983 
when they seized the World Cup at Lord's. That caused a seismic shift in the way cricket was perceived 
and administered and paved the way for India to become a commercial behemoth. A similar turn of 
events awaits Harmanpreet and company, and women's cricket at large. The coach, Amol Muzumdar, 
too had his moment. A domestic giant, he never got a chance to play for the senior men's team as his 
career ran parallel to the likes of Sachin Tendulkar and Rahul Dravid. Harmanpreet's feisty women 
ensured that their mentor finally understood what it means to prosper at the highest level. 
Having faltered in the 2005 and 2017 World Cup finals, India also had to contend with the pressure of 
playing at home. When three league matches were lost on the trot against South Africa, Australia, and 
England, the knives were out on social media. Still, the team persevered and every game produced a 
new star - Pratika Rawal, for instance. In the final, Shafali Verma and Deepti Sharma turned in an all-
round show, while Smriti Mandhana was as solid as ever. Earlier, the turn towards glory happened in the 
semifinal when Jemimah Rodrigues anchored an astounding chase against defending champions 
Australia. Her unbeaten 127 is one of the greatest knocks in Indian cricketing history. If India performed 
the giant killing act towards the climactic phase, so too did South Africa, as England discovered in the 
semifinal. In skipper Laura Wolvaardt, the Proteas have a splendid batter and her two tons in the 
semifinal and final were high on class and pugnacity. But the biggest takeaway is this: Indian women 
have found their place on cricket's biggest stage.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Glacial 
A. excellent 
2. Collision 
B. slow 
3. Hazard 
C. crash 
4. Exemplary 
D. danger 
5. Fatal 
E. lethal 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- C 
3- D 
4- A 
5- E 

            Justice in food: On new EAT-Lancet Commission report 
Justice in food systems implies transition to healthy, affordable diets 
y showing that food alone drives five of the six breached planetary boundaries and about 
30% of greenhouse-gas emissions worldwide, the new 'EAT-Lancet Commission on healthy, 
sustainable, and just food systems' report shows how food systems are at the centre of the 
overlapping climate, biodiversity, water, and pollution crises. Foods from animals account for 
most agricultural emissions whereas the grains dominate nitrogen, phosphorus, and water 
use. Only combined action, including cuts to food loss, enhanced and durable productivity gains, and 
dietary changes, can reverse these trends. The prediction on biogeochemical flows is stark: current 
agriculture leaves a global nitrogen surplus more than twice in excess of the safe limit. Efficiency gains 
left uncorrected by good policy can also spur more output that then erases environmental savings. The 
Commission is pragmatic, too, acknowledging that a response combining everything from dietary 
changes to emissions mitigation would still only barely return the world's food systems to safety vis-à-
vis the climate and freshwater crises by mid-century; the pressure on nutrient security will remain. It 
does make one questionable assumption, that GDP will grow 127% in 30 years, whereas policy should 
focus on lower growth and worse climate shocks. 
According to the report, India maintains a cereal-heavy diet while meeting benchmarks by 2050 entails 
more vegetables, fruits, nuts and legumes, which could raise average consumer prices. Affordability is 
already fragile in areas that import many of these foods, leaving consumers exposed to price shocks. 
Justice thus implies a transition towards healthier, more diverse diets while keeping prices in check. But 
changing diets may not always be desirable: preferences are anchored in religion, caste, and 
convenience, and on necessity vis-à-vis midday meals and procurement commitments. Rather than a 
diet-first strategy, then, new standards can cut harmful inputs, fiscal measures can make minimally 
processed foods cheaper, and procurement can normalize regionally familiar, more affordable dishes. 
Even then, supply-side reform is essential to overcome water stress, degraded soils, and fossil fuel 
dependence in cold chains and processing. India also needs to move away from implicit, open-ended 
incentives to extract groundwater. Finally, the Commission identifies market concentration, weak 
incentives for preventing labour and ecological harm, and undue corporate influence as factors that could 
stall change. Justice on the other hand demands stronger collective bargaining by workers and small 
producers and consumer representation in regulatory processes. These safeguards are partial at best 
today and need to become guaranteed in practice. 
B