VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Contract 
A. clear 
2. Slack 
B. sturdy 
3. Apparent 
C. perception 
4. Insight 
D. diminish 
5. Robust 
E. lax 
Answer: 
1-D 
2- E 
3- A 
4- C 
5- B 
Out of the fortress: On protecting India's tigers 
Tiger conservation policy rightly sees people as stakeholders, not trespassers 
 new Union Tribal Affairs Ministry policy framework is a reminder that India's conservation 
strategy is not a fortress conservation model but one in which protecting the country's tigers 
is a social contract. The policy's foremost virtue is reiteration that peopleliving near or inside 
forests cannotbe relocated until the Forest Rights Act (FRA) 2006 process has been 
completed, affirming that they are stakeholders, not trespassers. This view has sadly been 
falling out of favour with a government that is increasingly seeing forests solely for their 
climate utility and a judiciary keen to settle long-standing disputes. The policycasting 
relocation as an "exceptional" measure also overturnsthe 2024 National Tiger Conservation Authority 
directive to remove villages en masse from tiger reserves. Instead of treating humans and tigers as 
mutually exclusive, the framework promotes research and pilot projects on sustainable co-habitation 
that could help redefine tiger conservation through a more socially legitimate, and possibly more resilient 
A 

            model. Its invocationof the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act for unlawful evictions and a three-tier 
systemfor redress also providea safety net rarely available to these communities. 
This said, forest-dependent communities have varied needs: some expect hospitals and schools while 
others fight to preserve traditional lifestyles. Equally, tigers are sensitive and the reason many 
conservationists believe human-free core zones are essential to conserve apexpredators. A national 
missionto protect tigers on scientific terms needsto ensure such tracts. Fundamentally, while a national 
policy protects rights, fine-grained mechanisms sensitive to particular local conditions are crucial for 
people and tigers to sustainably coexist. Such mechanisms are however beyond the ability of top-level 
Ministries. The conservation establishment is likely to resist the new policy because it could slow efforts 
to consolidate tiger habitats and increase the implementation burden, potentially leading to dual policies 
on the ground. In fact, conservation in India is largely controlled by Forest Departments under the 
Environment Ministry and States have wide latitude in implementing the FRA. Even in places where 
local departments wield significant control, forced relocations may continue in States that do not enforce 
the proposed National Framework for Community-Centred Conservation and Relocation. While existing 
policy defines compensation criteria and the minimum inviolate area for a sustainable population, their 
implementation often violates established principles. Just as the fortress model has often been 
insensitive to people's rights in practice, exiting it should not mean entering one in which India's natural 
riches can be forsworn.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in 
Column B. 
COLUMN A 
COLUMN B 
1. DEVASTATING 
A. REVIVE 
2.EVACUATE 
B. FAIR 
3.IMPARTIAL 
C. UNDERPRIVILEGED 
4.REKINDLE 
D. WITHDRAW 
5.DEPRIVED 
E. DESTRUCTIVE 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- B 
4- A 
5- C 
Uneven growth: On industrial production data for September 
Increasing incomes and creating jobs are a must to boost demand 

            he industrial production data for September is especially useful as it provides insights into 
longer periods such as the second quarter and the first half of the financial year. The news is 
not all bad, but there are areas that warrant attention. When looked at on a half-yearly basis, 
the IIP datafor April-September 2025 showthat industrial growth was the slowest in at least 
five years. At just 3%, the half-yearly growth is well below what it should be. However, 
quarterly growth shows that things are improving - Q2 growth was a more robust 4.1%, 
compared to 2% in Q1. The bright spotin all of this, at least on the surface, hasbeen the 
manufacturing sector. In September, it grew by 4.8%, the second highest in this financial year. On a 
quarterly basis, the July-September 2025 quarter saw the manufacturing sector grow by a relatively 
strong 4.9%, the fastest quarterly growth it has seen since the quarter-ended December 2023. On a half-
yearly basis, too, the sector's growth bounced back to 4.1% in the April-September 2025 half, after 
having slowed to 3.8% in the first half of the previous year. Activityin the mining sector contractedin 
September 2025, the second quarter, as well as in the first half of the financial year. While some of this 
can be attributed to the monsoon this year, this performance is still unusually poor. Strengthening the 
sector should be a priority to shore up India's energy and strategic mineral security. 
The manufacturing sector's apparent strong performance, too, is not something that should be taken at 
face value. The data show that the growth is not broad-based, and is instead concentrated in some 
sectors. Of the 23 main manufacturing sub-sectors measured in the IIP, more than half contracted in the 
July-September 2025 quarter. Of concern is that labour-intensive sectors such as apparels, leather 
products, rubber products and plastics, all contracted in the September 2025 quarter. The sectors that 
grew included wood products, mineral products, basic metals and fabricated metal products, many of 
which are more capital intensive. If this trend persists, it could have negative implications for job 
creation, and warrants attention. The other troubling aspectof the data isthat the consumer non-durables 
sector has contracted for the last six consecutive quarters. While some of these are essential items 
such as salt and edible oils, others are items of discretionary spending. Much of this is because of the 
base effect, but slack demand has been a problem that policymakers have been grappling with for 
some time. The only real solution lies in increasing incomes and creating jobs.