Labour of care: On the Anshakalin Stri Parichars, women community health 
workers 
Women who facilitate rural health care should get better wages 
or decades, the women who serve as Anshakalin Stri Parichars (ASPs) in Maharashtra have 
been performing some of the hardest, yet least acknowledged, labour in the rural health 
system. For a wide breadth of responsibility, their monthly wage has stagnated at ₹3,000 since 
2016, decades behind inflation. They also lack job security, pensions, safety gear and travel 
allowance. In 2023, a labour court in Nagpur acknowledged that they deserved at least the 
protection of the Minimum Wages Act but left the decision to the State. In keeping with its 
verbal-only assurances, the State has even now only promised them ₹6,000 a month by 
December 2025 - much less than what multi-purpose health workers receive. The indifference is not 
accidental: ASPs, who predate Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHA) and anganwadi workers, have 
been easy to ignore because they are poor, rural women. Their neglect reveals a gendered and caste-
inflected hierarchy of labour within public health, where skilled work is low status and devalued because 
of who performs it. Their ongoing protests are part of an arc of agitation following similar sit-ins in 
Kolhapur, Nagpur, Ratnagiri and Yavatmal. In this regard, their plight resonates with that of ASHAs in 
other States. ASHAs, created under the National Rural Health Mission in 2005, are the community's first 
link to the health system and are also officially classified as "volunteers" rather than employees, 
compensated only through oft-delayed incentives, amounting to less than subsistence. Across States, 
ASHAs have repeatedly agitated for fixed honoraria, recognition as government staff and social security, 
and, like the ASPs' protests, have borne the same refrain: States cannot continue to build their health 
systems on the underpaid labour of women. 
These struggles highlight a structural contradiction. While India relies heavily on women community 
health workers and attendants to deliver maternal and child health care, immunization and disease 
surveillance, especially in rural areas, it refuses to recognize them as workers entitled to minimum 
benefits and dignity. The reliance is often framed as offering rural women "opportunities" for public 
service. Yet, in practice, it is exploitation. These women risk snakebite while clearing hospital grounds 
and death in accidents en route to vaccination duty without insurance or compensation. A health system 
that does not value the people who keep it functional and link its margins to formal care is bound to 
sabotage itself. To secure rural health is to secure the rights of those women through living wages, safe 
working conditions and stable employment.


Domestic vitality: On investment announcements, policy implications 
Domestic firms show more faith in India than foreign investors 
The latest data on investment announcements in the country paint a mixed picture, with varying 
policy implications. New project announcements by the private sector overall rose to nearly 
a 15-month high in the first half of this financial year to ₹9.9 lakh crore. Such investments have 
historically been driven by Indian firms, but that concentration has intensified in the last few 
years. While Indian firms accounted for 77% of all private sector announcements in 2018-19, 
that share was 94% in the first half of the current financial year. Taken together, these data 
points underscore a diametrically opposite outlook on the Indian economy held by domestic 
and foreign firms. Domestic firms seem increasingly optimistic. It remains to be seen how many of 
these announcements fructify, but the data show that the value of projects actually completed by Indian 
firms was also at a near 15-month high so far this fiscal. This should come as a relief to the government, 
which has been pushing the private sector to invest more. The data also show that most of these new 
investments are to be in the manufacturing sector - another strong positive for the economy. A large 
part of these new investments was announced before the GST rate cuts were first made public on 
August 15, implying the private sector's confidence goes deeper than an expectation of a temporary 
demand boost. If the investments do come through, that will leave the government with more fiscal room 
to address developmental and defence issues, both of which need its attention. 
Foreign firms, on the other hand, do not seem quite as convinced by the India story. The value of project 
announcements by foreign companies fell to ₹0.6 lakh crore in the first half of FY26, marking the third 
consecutive year of decline during this period, and also a five-year low. Several global factors have 
certainly dampened investor sentiment ever since the COVID-19 pandemic, but the fact remains that 
global investment outflows nevertheless increased 11% in 2024 and 3% in 2023. While the latest tariff 
friction with the U.S. would have shaken some confidence in India as an investment destination this year, 
the government needs to figure out why foreign companies were looking elsewhere even before. The 
data also reveal that fresh announcements by the government stood at ₹1.5 lakh crore during the period 
under review, down 71% over the same period last year. This is in line with the Centre's warnings that it 
will not be growing its capex as fast as before. However, with the government and foreign companies 
pulling back, the pressure on Indian firms increases. Simultaneously, the urgency to keep this 
momentum going through ease of doing business reforms also sharpens.