VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Garner 
A. doubtful 
2. Envisioned 
B. imagined 
3. Logjam 
C. collect 
4. Dubious 
D. suspended 
5. Furloughed 
E. bottleneck 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- B 
3- E 
4- A 
5- D 

            Swing, but do not miss: on India and the WHO's Global Tuberculosis Report 2025 
India's battle against TB will need renewed vigour and focus 
The World Health Organization's Global Tuberculosis Report 2025 was a mixed bag for India. 
While the tuberculosis (TB) incidence had the highest decline rate, globally, by 21% from 237 
per lakh population in 2015 to 187 per lakh population in 2024, India remains among the 
countries with the highest rates of TB, bearing 25% of the world's burden. This also means 
that India recorded the maximum number of cases of TB in 2024. Within the country, Uttar 
PrFadesh has the highest number of cases, followed by Maharashtra, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh. Delhi 
has the highest TB infection prevalence rate, though its actual case numbers are not that high. As far as 
multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) is concerned, the scenario seems quite challenging. India, as per the 
report, also recorded the highest number of drug-resistant TB cases in 2024 - accounting for 32% of 
global MDR-TB- and rifampicin-resistant (RR-TB) cases. With a treatment success rate for new and 
treated cases hovering at 90%, and at 77% for MDR-/RR-TB cases started on second line treatment, 
the saga of the mixed bag continues. India's TB mortality rate dropped from 28 deaths per one lakh 
population in 2015 to 21 deaths per one lakh population in 2024. Despite this improvement, the figure is 
still over three times higher than the government's elimination target. 
India has missed the target it set for itself, having advanced for itself the aim to eliminate TB - by 2025, 
five years before the global target of 2030. While incremental gains have not shored up to a dramatic 
result, this indeed has meant several million lives saved over the years. In this then, there is hope for a 
successful TB control programme in a country that has been battling TB for decades. Among the factors 
that have contributed to the gains include: harnessing advanced technologies, including AI and newer 
tools for molecular diagnosis and rapid detection of infection and resistance, facilitating better nutrition to 
prevent TB in susceptible populations, a scheme tailored to address drug-resistant forms of TB and the 
introduction of newer therapies (including BPaLM). The National TB Elimination Programme has set itself 
on a progressive path for the future, but unless crucial issues such as gaps in diagnosis (particularly in 
rural areas), taking care of stark socio-economic disparities and the high MDR-/RR-TB case burden, 
frequent drug shortages and looming malnutrition, are addressed with vigour, Indian efforts will continue 
to stay in the realm of swing and miss. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Blistering 
A. biased 
2. Skewed 
B. struggle 
3. Obscure 
C. scorching 
4. Contend 
D. standard 
5. Benchmark 
E. unclear 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- D 

            Tepid relief: On the end of the shutdown in the U.S. 
The ending of the shutdown does not preclude other crises 
resident Donald Trump has garnered the dubious honour of presiding over the longest 
federal government shutdown in U.S. history, a 43-day spiral of economic uncertainty and 
gloom that was finally terminated this week. Plunging the lives of nearly 1.4 million 
furloughed and pay-denied federal employees into chaos, Mr. Trump and his Republican 
colleagues in Congress appeared to prevail over the hopes of Democrats to extend health 
insurance subsidies for low-income Americans, set to expire at the end of 2025. In return, they 
conceded precious little - the assurance of holding a vote in the U.S. Senate on the subsidies, but not 
a vote in the House of Representatives and no promised support by Republicans for the Democrats' 
position on the subject. However, Republican lawmakers won by 60 votes against 40 in the Senate, to 
end the shutdown deadlock on Sunday, only because eight Democrats broke with their party ranks to 
support the package to fund some federal agencies and policies for the entire fiscal year, and others until 
January 30, 2026. A triumphant Mr. Trump vowed to press on with his campaign to end the 
congressional filibuster, the practice envisioned to be a means to check hasty or ham-handed 
legislative action, deployed by Democrats on this occasion to fight for affordable health care for low-
income families. 
While breaking the logjam in Congress will come as a relief to many, it is hard to understate the impact 
of the shutdown on the economy, which saw the suspension of a range of public services, including 
flights, a setback to routine functions in sectors such as food and nutrition benefits including food stamps 
for the poor, early learning programmes for poorer families, and those relating to the Internal Revenue 
Service, national parks and social services more broadly. Yet, the sheer muscle power that Republicans 
enjoy through their control of both houses of Congress helped them put Democrats on the back foot on 
the shutdown issue, despite the latter's victory in the recent mayoral, gubernatorial and other State-level 
elections. However, the acid test in the swing of the power pendulum between Mr. Trump, emboldened 
by the margin of his win at the ballots in last year's presidential election, and resurgent Democratic 
lawmakers, will be next year's mid-term elections. This will serve as a de facto referendum on the 
Trump administration's job performance and will principally include within its purview economic policy 
issues impacting ordinary Americans, such as jobs, as well as questions on health care, education and 
immigration. Unless Republicans give some quarter to their liberal and progressive colleagues across 
the aisle, they face the risk of alienating a sizeable cohort of voters in the months ahead. 
P