Infinite boxes: On the 2025 Chemistry Nobel Prize 
The Chemistry Nobel laureates established a new grammar of matter 
It would not be an overstatement to say that metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have redefined 
what materials can do for society. These porous crystalline structures are built from metal ions 
coordinated to organic linker molecules and offer gigantic amounts of internal surface area. Their 
cavities can be tuned to trap greenhouse gases, harvest drinking water from air, and store 
hydrogen or methane as clean fuels. As industries confront climate change and scarce resources, 
MOFs exemplify chemistry's power to reimagine sustainability, atom by atom. The roots of this 
year's Chemistry Nobel Prize, awarded to the developers of MOFs, go back to the 1980s, when 
Richard Robson, then at the University of Melbourne, wondered whether molecular architectures could 
be designed rather than found. Inspired by a ball-and-stick model used for teaching, he combined copper 
ions with an organic molecule whose four ends bore nitrile groups. Contrary to expectations, the 
ingredients self-assembled into an ordered, diamond-like crystal loaded with empty cavities. Susumu 
Kitagawa, working in Japan, picked up on the same spirit and made a breakthrough in 1997 when he 
built a 3D framework of cobalt, nickel or zinc ions linked by bipyridine molecules. When drained of water, 
the framework remained intact, allowing the gaps between its atoms to hold and release gases as 
required. In 1998, he also proposed that MOFs could be made of soft solids that 'breathed' as other 
molecules moved in and out. 
Meanwhile in the U.S., Omar Yaghi was dissatisfied with the trial-and-error of conventional reactions and 
pioneered reticular chemistry, with which he assembled predetermined building blocks into ordered 
networks. His first frameworks, reported in 1995, were robust two-dimensional nets. By 1999 he 
unveiled MOF-5, a zinc-based cubic lattice with extraordinary stability and surface area. A few grams 
contained the internal area of an entire football field. His approach allowed entire families of related 
MOFs to be designed systematically. Thus, Robson, Kitagawa and Yaghi established a new grammar of 
matter that allowed others to create thousands of MOFs, some of which moved from prototypes to 
industrial reactors and semiconductor manufacturing lines. The road ahead is even more promising but 
also exacting. Researchers are still working to make MOFs more durable in real-world conditions and 
cheaper to produce at scale. Integrating them into batteries and catalytic filters, for instance, requires 
engineering as finely tuned as their chemistry. For all these achievements, however, the vision honoured 
this year transcends any single material. By showing that chemistry can design empty space as precisely 
as solid matter, the laureates built room not only for molecules but for imagination itself.


Working with fireworks: On the Konaseema firecracker unit blast 
India must implement safety protocols for units dealing with explosives 
The blast in a firecracker unit at V. Savaram village in Konaseema district in Andhra Pradesh 
that claimed eight lives is the latest in a series of accidents that have punctuated the weeks 
leading up to Deepavali, year after year. The unit was among the 18 firecracker manufacturing 
units in the district that had had a safety audit about a month ago. The units had been issued 
licences by the District Collector. Such incidents have been reported in the district in earlier 
years too. A three-day ban on firecracker manufacturing has been imposed and a fresh 
safety audit has been ordered. It would appear that no anomalies were found in the audit and 
no red flags were raised. Besides the 18 firecracker manufacturing units, there are 18 other units in the 
district that procure and sell crackers wholesale during the season. While firecracker manufacture is not 
a major activity in the district, there are some seasonal units. There were 10 people in the unit that used 
chemicals to manufacture the crackers when an electrical fire led to an explosion and the collapse of a 
wall. That the authorities found it difficult to identify the dead would point to poor record keeping. Further, 
Konaseema is in the Godavari basin which has extensive oil and gas drilling and transport operations 
including pipelines. Fire accidents can be devastating if they spread to these facilities. 
Firecracker manufacturing is not a major economic activity across India barring Tamil Nadu. The 
awareness levels and scrutiny are, therefore, not always high, and Konaseema would seem to be one 
such case. The nodal agency that licenses these units is the Petroleum & Explosives Safety 
Organization (PESO) which has various levels of licensing with elaborate safety protocols. Fire needs 
fuel, air and a source of ignition. Cracker manufacturing units have many combustible materials, which 
are the fuel, which is why sources of fire must be completely absent. It is for this reason too that electric 
equipment and switchboards must meet high fire safety standards and should intrinsically protect 
against the starting of fires. Even if an electric fire were to start, it should not spread to areas where 
explosive chemicals are used. An added layer of safety typical in PESO protocols is that the electric 
equipment can only be operated when no human would be present. But it would seem that such 
elaborate protocols were either absent or poorly implemented at Konaseema. The accident shows that 
there is a case for all such units across the country to scrupulously apply the high-level safety protocols 
of PESO.