Next best: On tennis, new winners 
The generational shift is complete in men's and women's tennis 
arlos Alcaraz's tennis life came full circle on Sunday. Three years ago, on these very courts in 
New York, the irresistible Spaniard secured his maiden Grand Slam trophy and became the 
World No. 1 for the very first time. After four Majors elsewhere, the 22-year-old clinched his 
sixth with a rousing four-set victory over Jannik Sinner in the US Open final. With that, 
Alcaraz regained his position at the top of the sport, a spot Sinner had owned - through a 
three-month doping ban - since June 10, 2024. The success also marked an evolution in 
Alcaraz's play as he traded some of his spectacular and risky shot-making for a bit of 
clinical efficiency. The result was that he did not lose a set until the final, faced just 10 breakpoints all 
through and surrendered his serve only thrice. Prior to Roland-Garros, Sinner was deemed the better 
player on hard courts and Alcaraz on clay and grass. But with the Italian coming within a point of beating 
Alcaraz in the French Open final and then eclipsing him at Wimbledon, and Alcaraz turning the tables 
at Flushing Meadows, the era-defining Alcaraz-Sinner rivalry has been pushed into uncharted 
territories. The factthat the two have swept the last eight Slams and met in three straight Major finals - 
an Open Era record for a calendar year - meansthat the likes of 24-time Slam winner Novak Djokovic 
now resemble the last vestiges of a once glorious past. 
While Alcaraz and Sinner continue to indulge in a cat-and-mouse game, Aryna Sabalenka, by 
defending her US Open crown and taking home a fourth hard court Major overall, provedthat she was 
the numero uno on the acrylic. Starting 2023, the Belarusian has been in the final of the Australian Open 
and US Open all six times, and won four of those. During this period, she has also reached two 
semifinals at Wimbledon, and a final and semifinal each at Roland-Garros, evidence of her remarkable 
consistency and fast-developing all-court nous. In Amanda Anisimova, the World No. 1 had a tough 
opponent. The American was on an inspired run of her own, having made it to her second consecutive 
Slam final. The 24-year-old had beaten No. 2 Iga Swiatek, who had handed her a chastening 6-0, 6-0 
defeat at the All England Club in July, and outgunned four-time Major champion Naomi Osaka in 
arguably the match of the fortnight. But Sabalenka, who has at times let emotions override her tennis, 
stayedcalm and collected. It was her first triumph in three Major finals as World No. 1. There is now the 
promise of many more.


Hockey glory: On India's Asia Cup win at Rajgir 
India remains the team to beat in Asia, but the real challenges are elsewhere 
s Harmanpreet Singh lifted the Asia Cup under a fire-lit Rajgir night sky, it was a reassertion 
of India's continental dominance in hockey. India now holds all three continental titles - 
the Asian Games, Asian Champions Trophy (ACT) and the Asia Cup - becoming the first 
men's team to achieve this. This was India's fourth Asia Cup title, one away from Korea, 
whom they comprehensively defeated in the final. The winon Sunday also assuresIndia of 
a spot at next year's World Cup, jointly hosted by Belgium and The Netherlands. But it was 
the way India grew in the tournament that lends hope for a better performance than its 
recent outings in Europe. The start was none too impressive with the Indians huffing their way to 
narrow wins in the sweltering, sticky heat of Bihar, which made it evident that the tournament was a 
showstopper ahead of the Assembly election later this year. But as they got used to the conditions and 
found their rhythm, the Indians got better. When in free flow, the Indians are a pleasure to watch. As the 
World No. 7 team and the only Asian side in the top-10, they were expected to cruise to the title, but 
sporting success is decided on the field of play, not rankings on an excel sheet. 
Which is why China, despite a ranking of 22 and finishing fourth, isbeing considered a serious 
challenger and a Los Angeles 2028 Olympics hopeful. Or why Korea, despite no great results in recent 
times, adjusted, adapted and tested India to the maximum. A below-par performance just before the 
Asia Cup, in Europe, where India lost seven of its eight FIH Pro League games, and an average tour of 
Australia meant that the players came to Rajgir high on preparation but low on results. The title now 
gives India a whole year to plan and prepare for one of the most hectic but crucial phases for Indian 
hockey. The World Cup and the Asian Games next year are scheduled less than a month apart. Coach 
Craig Fulton is aware of the challenges. The win did not see him hopping with joy; instead, he was 
calculated in his evaluation of the team, continuing to insist that the bigger task will be against the big 
boys of Europe and Australia. In the 28 months that he has been in charge, Fulton has racked up an 
impressive record - two ACTs, the Asiad, an Olympic bronze and now the Asia Cup. The road ahead 
will be tough but the team seems to have got its mojo.