Man of faith: On C.P. Radhakrishnan, Vice-President-elect of India 
The new Vice-President can help end combative hostilities in the Rajya Sabha 
.P. Radhakrishnan, 68, who joined the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) as a teenager, 
has been elected as the Vice-President of India, marking another attempt by the Bharatiya 
Janata Party (BJP) to link its version of nationalist ideology with the Sangh Parivar agenda. 
Mr. Radhakrishnan was a member of the T.N. Jan Sangh executive committee by 1974 - a 
time when the Sangh Parivar's presence in Tamil Nadu was marginal and his political 
affiliation was clearly inspired by ideology than careerism. On September 9, 2025, he 
became the Vice-President of India, a reward for his ideological fealty on the one hand, and 
as a milestone in his journey of the RSS on the other. He secured 452 out of 752 valid votes, 
and defeated Justice B. Sudershan Reddy from the INDIA bloc by 152 votes. He was elected 
to the Lok Sabha twice, from Coimbatore in 1998 and 1999, as a BJP candidate supported by 
the AIADMK and then the DMK. He served on parliamentary committees and a special committee 
investigating a stock market scam. He also represented India at the UN General Assembly. From 2004 
to 2007, as BJP State president, he undertook a 93-day "Ratha Yatra", advocating river linking, ending 
untouchability, countering terrorism, and promoting a Uniform Civil Code. 
As the Governor of Jharkhand (2023) and Maharashtra (2024), Mr. Radhakrishnan expanded his 
administrative experience and enhanced his political stature, but his new role will be a different kettle of 
fish. As the V-P, he will also function as the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, which will test his political 
acumen. He has spoken in support of federalism and smoother Centre-State relations in the past, but 
the general inclination of the BJP and the RSS is towards a centralisation of power. The role of 
Parliament has weakened in recent years even as the executive has expanded its power to 
unprecedented levels. The Rajya Sabha has been particularly undermined by arbitrary classification of 
Bills as finance Bills that do not require its approval. The concept of the Rajya Sabha as a council of 
States existed more in theory than in practice always, but its deliberate erosion is a recent 
development. The relationship between the government and the Opposition has become hostile and 
toxic in recent years. Even parliamentary committees have become battlegrounds of senseless rhetoric 
rather than platforms of thoughtful deliberations. Mr. Radhakrishnan has his task cut out. With his 
affable demeanour, he just might be able to nudge the government and the Opposition toward better 
cooperation and less combativeness.


Reckless escalation: On Israel's attack on Qatar 
India should be more forthright in opposing Israel's regional war 
ven by Israel's own standards, its September 9, 2025 attack on Qatar, targeting Hamas 
leaders, was a reckless escalation of the regional conflict - one that could make peace in 
Gaza even harder to achieve. Since Hamas's October 7, 2023 assault, Israel has bombed a 
number of Arab countries, besides devastating Gaza. Its strikes on Iran in June triggered a 
brief aerial war. Israel keeps attacking Syria, Lebanon and Yemen at will. But Qatar, a wealthy 
Gulf monarchy, is a U.S. ally that hosts America's largest military base in West Asia, and a 
crucial mediator in ceasefire talks between Israel and Hamas. Yet, none of this deterred 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who claimed "full responsibility" for the attack. Israeli jets 
targeted a house where Hamas leaders had reportedly assembled to discuss a ceasefire proposal. The 
strike drew sharp criticism and condemnation from across the world. Even U.S. President Donald 
Trump, Israel's greatest ally with whose blessings Mr. Netanyahu is carrying out his genocidal war on 
Palestinians in Gaza, said he was unhappy, while the White House has assured Qatar that there would 
be no more attacks. 
Besides the flagrant violation of sovereignty, the Qatar strike risks setting back efforts to end the Gaza 
war. Qatar has long hosted Hamas's political leadership, with the tacit approval of the U.S. and other 
world powers, to keep channels of negotiation open. Last month, Hamas accepted a ceasefire proposal 
put forward by the mediators, but Mr. Netanyahu rejected it and vowed to press ahead with conquering 
famine-stricken Gaza City. Now, by attacking Hamas leaders in the mediator country, he has 
demonstrated his unwillingness to pursue peace. A ceasefire could threaten his government's survival - 
and he appears willing to prolong the war, even at the cost of more Palestinian lives. The strike also 
delivers another blow to the already fragile Arab-Israel normalisation process. Saudi Arabia, which has 
walked back from normalization talks since October 7, would find it harder to recognise an Israeli state 
that bombs its Gulf Arab neighbour. Israel's unchecked military aggression also exposes the failure of 
Mr. Trump, who has called himself a "man of peace" with claims of having ended even the India-Pakistan 
conflict of May 2025. But when it comes to Israel, which is facing serious allegations of war crimes and 
genocide, he seems either unable or unwilling to use the leverage at his disposal. India should be 
alarmed by Israel's move to expand the war to the Gulf, an energy-rich region where millions of Indians 
live. Prime Minister Modi has condemned the "violation" of Qatar's sovereignty without naming Israel. 
India should be more forthright in opposing Israel's regional war, and work with other regional and global 
powers to restore stability in West Asia.