A new leaf: On Environment Audit Rules 2025 
Environmental compliance needs to be monitored at all levels 
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has brought into effect a set of rules 
called the Environment Audit Rules, 2025, that allows the vital activity of environmental 
monitoring and auditing to go beyond the remit of State Pollution Control Boards. The rules will 
largely scrutinize whether industrial units are compliant with environmental regulation. The 
over all frame work for monitoring and compliance within the existing environmental 
framework ispresently supported by the Central Pollution Control Board, the Regional Offices of the 
Environment Ministry, and the State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution Control Committees. They have, 
however, been facing significant constraints in terms of manpower, resources, capacity and 
infrastructure. "These limitations have hampered their ability to comprehensively monitor and enforce 
environmental compliance across the vast number of projects and industries operating nationwide," said 
a press statement by the Environment Ministry. This scheme aims to bridge the manpower and 
infrastructure deficits faced by regulatory authorities, thereby strengthening the effective implementation 
of environmental compliance mechanisms. 
Under the new rules, private agencies can get themselves accredited as auditors. Much like chartered 
accountants, environment auditors can get themselves licensed and be authorized to evaluate the 
compliance of projects with environmental laws and their adherence with best practices in the 
prevention, control and abatement of pollution. Environmental regulation has, in recent years, 
transcended policing and bookkeeping. Given that human-caused climate change is seen as a problem 
that nations must collectively fix, new dimensions to environmental regulations have emerged. Thus, 
audits undertaken by these agencies can also be used for compliance with 'Green Credit Rules', under 
which individuals and organisations can gain tradeable 'credits' for afforestation, sustainable water 
management and waste management among other activities. Beyond industrial units, nearly every 
company in India will have to account for its direct and indirect carbon emissions. This will entail fairly 
complex accounting practices, which are beyond what Pollution Control Board officials can handle. 
However, preparing for the future should not be at the expense of compromising core responsibilities. It 
is usually at the district, block and panchayat levels that the most flagrant environmental travesties 
abound, which escape notice usually because of the lack of trained staff. The new regime must seek to 
empower them too. 
T


Greying with grace: on the Sample Registration System Statistical Report 
Changing population dynamics require a policy reorientation for governments 
f there was any doubt about India going through the throes of a demographic change, confirmation 
came with the Sample Registration System (SRS) Statistical Report indicating a fall in the country's 
Crude Birth Rate (CBR) and Total Fertility Rate. As per the SRS data for 2023, India'sCBR, 
defined as the number of annual live births in a population per 1,000 people, haddeclined to 18.4, 
a drop from 19.1 in 2022. The country's TFR had also fallen to 1.9, after hovering at 2.0 in 2021 
and 2022. The TFR indicates the average number of children a woman will have in her lifetime to 
replace that generation, and a TFR of 2.1 births per woman is considered replacement-level 
fertility, translating to a stable population over time. Any figure over 2.1 suggests a growing population 
while rates below 2.1 signify a clear trend towards population decline and aging. Of course, as usual, 
for a country of this size and diversity, there were vast regional differences. The highest CBR was in 
Bihar at 25.8, and the lowest was in Tamil Nadu at 12. Bihar also reported the highest TFR (2.8) and 
Delhi, the lowest (1.2). Eighteen States and Union Territories had a TFR below the replacement level, 
and all States reporting higher than replacement level TFR were in northern India - Bihar, Uttar 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Chhattisgarh. Following Delhi, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, 
and Maharashtra too have a TFR below 2.0. Simultaneously, as expected from such a demographic 
shift, SRS data indicated the proportion of people above 60 rose by 0.7 percentage points in a year to 
9.7% of the population. Kerala has the highest proportion of elderly population, at 15%, while Assam, 
Delhi and Jharkhand reported the lowest proportion of their population over 60 years. 
It will be foolhardy to look away from the writing on the wall. As the most populous nation, home to 
over 1.46 billion people, the current declining trend will admittedly take several years to have an impact 
on the population. However, there is no doubt that the nation, having, at least theoretically, prepared for 
'more' all these years, shouldnow prepare for a different future, while continuing to leverage the 
demographic dividend it still possesses thanks to a relatively young workforce. A greying nation will 
come with its own attendant concerns and needs - financial, universal access for reduced mobility, 
physical and mental health-care facilities and social support services. A 'young' nation, after all, will 
require a massive realignment to be ready to serve the needs of a growing population of the elderly.