Fire in the sky: on Deepavali and the battle for clean air 
Green crackers are a compromise between joyful festivities and public health 
This Deepavali, firecrackers are being burst under legal sanction in Delhi. The Supreme 
Court, in an order this week, modified a ban it had sanctioned since 2018, allowing the use 
of green crackers during the festival. While the decision comes with caveats on 
implementation, it underscores the continuous challenge authorities face in dealing with 
pressures from cultural norms and economic activity while prioritising public health and 
environmental safety. The re-introduction of legally sanctioned, less-polluting options marks a shift in 
government policy after the BJP came to power and aims to accommodate traditional celebrations 
while acknowledging the severe environmental impact of conventional fireworks in Delhi, which is 
disproportionately affected by noxious winter air. This move recognizes that for many across India, the 
use of fireworks is an integral cultural expression of joy during the festival of lights. Furthermore, the 
firecracker industry supports the livelihoods of lakhs of people, making economic considerations part of 
the regulatory landscape. 
However, as the history of Delhi's air pollution shows, the battle for clean air is a complex interplay of 
meteorology, economic structure, population, and geography. Multiple expert bodies and task forces 
have deployed science and widespread measurement-at a scale few cities in the world have 
attempted-to conclude that air quality is impacted by diverse sources: transport, industry, agriculture-
waste burning, biomass burning, construction, and road dust at different periods. Evidence also suggests 
that intervals of extended rains often have the largest effect on improving average air quality levels. 
While the contribution of firecrackers to the annual pollution problem may be temporary, the data 
confirms that the resultant spike makes an already bad air situation worse. Allowing the use of 
scientifically developed 'green' crackers-which are estimated to be about two-thirds less noxious-is an 
effort to tolerate a temporary surge under controlled conditions. This approach seeks to find a middle 
ground between honouring tradition and minimising harm. But while green crackers represent an 
improvement over conventional ones, they are not zero-emission products. In legalizing this less-
effulgent option, governments and courts must be careful not to take the focus away from the need for 
public commitment to stricter environmental norms rooted in science and reason, and not in hope and 
faith. There is no alternative to comprehensive, consistent action against all sources of pollution. 
T


Claim, counterclaim: On India and foreign policy 
India must speak out on world issues with moral clarity, not tactical ambiguity 
resident Donald Trump appears to have set the cat among the pigeons yet again so far as 
recent Indian foreign policy actions are concerned, this time with regard to an alleged 
assurance by Prime Minister Narendra Modi that India would halt its oil imports from Russia. 
Speaking at the White House, Mr. Trump said that Mr. Modi had assured him on Wednesday 
(October 15, 2025) that India "will not be buying oil from Russia... Now we've got to get China 
to do the same thing". This utterance follows in the wake of a summer of heightened temperatures in the 
bilateral space, after multiple claims by Mr. Trump that he played a role in bringing Operation Sindoor to 
an abrupt halt, with a full and immediate ceasefire agreed only after "a long night of talks mediated by 
the United States". India was quick to challenge the White House's narrative, with a Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs spokesperson saying that he was unaware of a conversation between the leaders on the previous 
day, even if discussions were "ongoing" about deepening India's energy cooperation with the U.S. 
Nevertheless, he did not unequivocally confirm or deny Mr. Trump's assertion that India would be halting 
its purchases of Russian oil. A similar 'soft denial' approach seemed to be the chosen tack in the 
aftermath of Operation Sindoor. 
The quandary faced by Indian foreign policy strategists is that India is in a sensitive phase of bilateral 
engagement with the U.S., specifically regarding its hopes for bilateral trade deal in the nearer term and 
shared regional goals in the context of the rise of China, over the longer arc of the evolving balance of 
power in Asia. Additionally, Mr. Trump's sheer chimerical nature, which is either the trait of an 
impulsive but popular leader on American soil, or the standard "art of the deal" playbook trait of a 
President seeking to bring global counterparts to the negotiating table, appears to be routinely frustrating 
South Block mandarins seeking predictability in their engagements with U.S. interlocutors. India may 
have found an appropriate response in avoiding knee-jerk public reactions to the sometimes outlandish 
claims of Mr. Trump. However, the bigger challenge for New Delhi is to clarify its global posture on 
issues such as the purchase of Russian oil in the context of Russian aggression in Ukraine. It would do 
well to remember that it is not so much the strident voices of the North Atlantic that matter as much as 
India's hopes to be a true global power one day, and speak with the moral clarity that accompanies such 
a title. 
P