Making sense: On Krasznahorkai and the Nobel Prize in Literature for 2025 
Krasznahorkai gets recognition for melancholic stories in an absurd world 
It a time of two wars in the world, a writer described as a "master of the apocalypse" has 
been awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature for 2025. Hungarian author László 
Krasznahorkai was chosen by the Swedish Academy "for his compelling and visionary 
oeuvre that, in the midst of apocalyptic terror, reaffirms the power of art". The 71-year-old 
novelist and screenwriter has won many accolades and was a perennial candidate. Often 
compared to greats such as Franz Kafka, Fyodor Dostoevsky and Herman Melville, his 
dystopian, absurd and melancholic stories mirror life in Hungary under oppression and 
beyond in the pre and post-fall of the Iron Curtain era, with a chilling resonance to contemporary times. 
He gained recognition with his 1985 novel of ideas, Satantango, translated into English by George 
Szirtes in 2012. It revolves around a group of destitute residents of a collective farm on the eve of the fall 
of communism, waiting for a miracle, which needless to say would not happen. The tone is set with the 
epigraph, from Kafka's The Castle: 'In that case, I'll miss the thing by waiting for it.' Krasznahorkai has 
collaborated with film-maker Béla Tarr to adapt his works for the cinema. With his second book, The 
Melancholy of Resistance, he began to be hailed as a postmodern visionary. It was published in 
Hungarian in 1989, when the wall came down, and first translated into English in 1998. 
In The Melancholy, a circus comes to a town with the carcass of a giant whale, and sinister happenings 
follow. His unbroken sentences - like a fellow laureate, Jon Fosse, Krasznahorkai too often omits full 
stops - are often deemed difficult and demanding. His translator calls Krasznahorkai's work "a slow 
lava flow of narrative, a vast black river of type". Krasznahorkai's travels to China and Japan in the early 
2000s inspired his contemplative novel, Seiobo There Below. The breadth of his oeuvre is evident in the 
homage 
The 
pays 
to 
literary 
giants: 
Dostoevsky's 
The 
Idiot 
gets 
a 
relook 
in 
Baron 
Wenckheim'sHomecoming; Melville's ghost haunts Spadework for a Palace: Entering the Madness of 
Others, a story set in Manhattan. In an interview to writer Hari Kunzru for The Yale Review, 
Krasznahorkai says "the apocalypse is now", pointing out that "hell and heaven are both on earth, and 
they are here now". About the role of art in the future, he says: "Art is humanity's extraordinary response 
to the sense of lostness that is our fate." By awarding literature's top prize to Krasznahorkai, the Swedish 
Academy signals that it is turning to serious but innovative literature and art in a world where little makes 
sense.


None too soon: On the setting of the northeast monsoon 
The timely arrival of the northeast monsoon bodes well for farmers 
The timely arrival of the northeast monsoon, which benefits many parts of the southern 
peninsula, especially Tamil Nadu and the coastal and Rayalaseema regions of Andhra 
Pradesh, has brought relief to the region, given its importance from an agricultural as well as 
a disaster management perspective. Against its normal arrival date of October 20 (plus or 
minus seven days), the monsoon set in on October 16. The India Meteorological Department 
has forecast "above normal" rain with more than 112% of the long period average. Going by the data for 
1971-2020, the season's share in the annual rainfall is 48% for Tamil Nadu and over 30% for Andhra 
Pradesh. The monsoon also witnesses at least three cyclonic disturbances over the Bay of Bengal. 
There is also the added factor of cloudbursts, which are more frequent now, according to an Indian 
Institute of Tropical Meteorology study. Consequently, coastal States face urban flooding with residents 
of Chennai living in dread of it, going by their experiences of the past 10 years. 
Keeping this in mind, the Tamil Nadu government is putting in place a real-time flood forecasting system 
for Chennai to calibrate excess water discharge from the reservoirs in and around the city. In addition, 
the authorities, as in other southern States, are preparing the official machinery to handle any situation. 
Over the years, the loss of lives has dropped after effective coordination among the agencies concerned. 
However, there are still many areas in need of more focused attention. The state of stormwater drains 
and water courses through cities leaves much to be desired, but State governments alone cannot be 
held responsible for this. That sections of people still use waterbodies as dumping yards only 
aggravates the problem, highlighting the near absence of community ownership among urban residents. 
In the farm sector, the shortage of fertilizers, particularly urea, has been bothering agriculturists. About 
a month ago, Tamil Nadu Chief Minister M.K. Stalin, in a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, 
flagged the issue. Other States which are dependent on rainfall during the southwest monsoon, had 
also complained of urea shortage. The Union Ministry of Agriculture is reported to have enhanced urea 
demand for October - it was 36.65 lakh tonnes a year ago. Looking at the macro picture of the 
monsoon, the message is that as rainfall is expected to be more intense, the authorities at every level 
have to be vigilant and act in unison so that any adverse impact is reduced, if not eliminated. 
T