Letter and spirit: On Supreme Court and Waqf (Amendment) Act 2025 judgment 
The Supreme Court did well to stay and uphold different Waqf Act provisions 
The Supreme Court of India walked a tightrope in its judgment delivered on September 15, 
2025, on the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025, which amended the 1995 Waqf Act to regulate 
Muslim religious endowments, including vast land holdings across India. The Court put several 
controversial provisions on hold but refused to freeze the entire Act on grounds of 
constitutionality and other concerns. This turned out to be a rare instance where supporters 
and critics of the Act claimed vindication for their respective positions in the Court's order. 
The government views the amendments as necessary to curb the alleged misuse and 
corruption under the earlier Waqf Act, while critics, including the Congress, see it as arbitrary 
interference in the affairs of the Muslim community. The Court has now stayed the requirement that only 
Muslims practising for five years can create waqf, and the power vested in District Collectors to 
adjudicate waqf property disputes. It also capped non-Muslim members to four in the Central Waqf 
Council and three in State Boards, down from potentially 12 and seven, respectively. The Court also 
directed that CEOs of Waqf Boards should preferably be Muslims. The removal of the provision for 
waqf-by-user recognition in the amended law has been upheld as valid by the Court, with the caveat that 
waqf properties registered as on April 8, 2025, under such a claim remain protected. Restrictions on 
waqf status for protected monuments and tribal lands were deemed constitutionally valid. 
While the order diffuses the conflict for now, the larger question of balancing religious autonomy and 
state regulation continues - and that is better tackled through building consensus within and between 
communities. Autonomy claims cannot be a facade for misuse of community resources by its own 
leaders; nor can any group of people lay claim over public resources in the name of faith. The state has 
not only the right but also the responsibility to ensure that people are not taken for a ride by anyone. 
The trouble arises when the state discriminates between religious groups in the application of this 
principle. The Court rightly went with the philosophy of presumption of constitutionality of laws passed by 
Parliament. But partisan politics of an extreme nature can delegitimise representational democracy. The 
government must consciously negotiate with the Opposition in Parliament to ensure that the laws 
enacted have the widest political and social acceptance. When laws affecting particular communities are 
made, they should be taken into confidence. None of this is easy, and complete consensus is never 
possible, but attempts should be made in that direction.


H-1B, maybe: On Donald Trump and the H-1B visa fees hike 
India's tech workers must reduce their reliance on U.S. jobs 
resident Donald Trump's decision to charge new applicants for the H-1B highly skilled non-
immigrant visa $100,000, nearly six times the current fee, has caused widespread 
consternation that not only might the lives of tens of thousands of potential visa applicants in 
the tech space be impacted, leading to "humanitarian consequences" for families, as 
mentioned by India's Ministry of External Affairs, but there will also be widespread disruption 
among major tech companies in the U.S. that rely on hiring skilled workers under this visa. 
While the number of visas issued in this category has been capped at 85,000 per year since 
2004, and allocations are decided through a lottery, reports based on U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services data suggest that applications for the upcoming fiscal year have dropped to a four-year low of 
nearly 3,59,000. Indian nationals typically account for 71% of these visas, yet data also suggest that 
close to 60% of these visa recipients earn less than $100,000, which, over the longer term, implies that 
their employers may find it harder to justify hiring such specialised workers from abroad. The External 
Affairs Ministry's response to the White House action included a reiteration of the fact that "Skilled talent 
mobility and exchanges have contributed enormously to technology development, innovation, economic 
growth, competitiveness and wealth creation in the U.S. and India", yet there is limited scope for South 
Block to apply pressure, diplomatic or political, to get the policy reversed. 
However, the fallout for Indian citizens can be contained if there is a proactive approach by the 
Government to bolster India's infrastructure and undertake necessary reforms to improve the prospects 
for the Indian tech industry to make even greater strides than it has done so far. This might be achieved 
by capitalising on opportunities to develop new capabilities in the Artificial Intelligence space and 
exploring new markets across Asia, including China and Russia, and in parts of Europe, where the 
transatlantic contagion of nativist protectionism has not yet found willing takers. While the Trump order 
is set to expire within a year, there is no guarantee that it would not be extended, making it all the more 
pertinent for policymakers in India to evolve a long-term plan to reduce reliance of Indian tech workers 
on the shrinking pool of job opportunities in the U.S. economy. As India and other countries adjust to this 
new reality of the hostility of the Trump White House to welcoming future innovators, job-creators, and 
tax-payers to their shores, it is the U.S. rather than other nations that will suffer a shortage of scientific 
and engineering prowess to fuel economic progress.