VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Hovering 
A. progressive 
2. Eliminate 
B. lingering 
3. Harnessing 
C. eradicate 
4. Incremental 
D. utilizing 
5. Susceptible 
E. vulnerable 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- C 
3- D 
4- A 
5- E 

            Tunnel vision: On the Bihar election result and the Congress's stance 
The Congress seems to be blaming the ECI to avoid introspection 
The disastrous performance of the Mahagatbandhan, led by the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD), 
in the Bihar Assembly elections, has been followed by claims attributing this to a purported 
collusion between the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Election Commission of India 
(ECI). The RJD won 25 seats, the Congress six, the CPI (Marxist-Leninist) (Liberation) two, 
and the CPI (Marxist) just one. Allegations of vote theft revolve around pre-existing concerns 
about the ECI's perceived bias towards the BJP, and around the more contestable claim of 
manipulating electoral rolls during the Special Intensive Revision (SIR). The exercise raised concerns 
that it was moving the responsibility of proving one's eligibility to vote to the people instead of 
strengthening the state and the ECI to continue upholding it. Concerns of this nature are relevant, 
including for the ongoing second phase of SIR. But prevailing explanations of the National Democratic 
Alliance's win are also not incredible, converging on high women's turnout, focused welfare and cash 
transfers, a recalibrated coalition of OBC and EBC groups, and organisational capacity. In fact, the ECI's 
decision to not restrain the Nitish Kumar government from transferring cash to beneficiaries of a State 
women's scheme, by accepting it as "ongoing", contradicts a bar the ECI set during the 2023 Rajasthan 
Assembly polls for Ashok Gehlot's Congress government. Thus, the allegations against the ECI are 
partly due to its concerning conduct. 
However, there is no verifiable evidence that the pattern of deletions by SIR across booths aligns with 
the voting preferences of one coalition's supporters. There is also no method to match each deleted 
entry with a credible, pre-existing record of partisan preference. In the constituencies that the 
Mahagatbandhan covered in its 'Voter Adhikar Yatra', which framed deletions as part of a concerted 
attempt to dispossess specific groups of their franchise, it performed as poorly as in the rest of Bihar. 
This failure may be because the Mahagatbandhan neither consolidated public sentiment following the 
Yatra nor linked livelihood issues with the SIR's inclusivity. It also lacked credible answers to the NDA 
campaign that electing Tejashwi Yadav as Chief Minister would lead to 'jungle raj', a reference to the 
RJD's previous terms. The election was also fought on the question of who should be Chief Minister - 
Mr. Kumar or Mr. Yadav - and the polarization on this question evidently favoured the former. 
Opposition parties, particularly the Congress, should assess their failures in Bihar in a way that does not 
undermine an already fragile public confidence in the ECI. Blaming the ECI to avoid introspection can 
be self-defeating for the Congress, to the extent that more of that is possible. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Manipulate 
A. strengthen 
2. Fragile 
B. division 
3. Consolidate 
C. influence 
4. Polarization 
D. devastating 
5. Disastrous 
E. delicate 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- E 
3- A 
4- B 
5- D 

            Excessive dependence: On India's external trade landscape 
A structural shift in India's trade portfolio is essential 
India's record goods trade deficit in October ($41.68 billion) follows a sequential build-up from 
September ($32.15 billion), reflecting a disturbing turn in its external trade landscape. The shock 
from the U.S.'s tariffs has been largely responsible - a full 50% levy that came into effect in 
August - at a time when the U.S. had become India's largest single export market (since about 
2018-19). But the main cause of the 11.8% year-on-year (YoY) drop in goods exports to $34.38 
billion ($38.98 billion in October 2024) and the precipitous rise in imports lies in a record surge in 
precious metal inflows. Gold imports nearly tripled from last October ($4.92 billion) and inbound silver 
rose more than fivefold. This suggests that the bullion surge is not merely seasonal but also a hedge 
against growing economic uncertainty. The rupee's weakening from about ₹85.6 to a dollar in April to 
around ₹88.4 to a dollar in October, and the net foreign portfolio outflow in September (leading into a 
recovery in October) further corroborate the hedging. What is troubling about October's merchandise 
data is the steep fall in exports of labour-intensive sectors such as textiles and apparel - cotton yarn 
and handlooms 13.31%; man-made yarn 11.75%; readymade garments 12.88%, and engineering goods 
16.71%. The U.S. has been the largest market for these sectors for some years now. Overall exports to 
the U.S. declined by 9% YoY in October. 
The import surge in goods value is partly explained by the depreciating rupee but also strongly 
suggests the increased use of cheaper imported intermediate goods to keep finished exports 
competitive, rather than domestic sourcing. The detailed HS-chapter breakdown of imports by 
commodity and source country will elucidate this further. Meanwhile, the Centre has stepped in with 
export-promotion initiatives, for ₹25,060 crore over six years, and the Reserve Bank of India has 
announced relief measures for exporters hit by tariff headwinds. Nonetheless, it is too early to conclude 
that this shift is structural rather than an immediate reaction to a major external shock. Rerouting of 
exports, new market access and supply-chain realignment take months if not years. The record October 
deficit may yet prove to be a blip, particularly if the India-U.S. Bilateral Trade Agreement is concluded 
swiftly and tariffs are rolled back. The steep drop in Russian imports (-27.73%) and a concurrent rise in 
U.S. imports (13.89%), suggest an attempt to assuage American concerns of a widening trade deficit, 
and to reduce Russian crude inflows. Even if the overall deficit persists, despite a thaw in U.S. relations, 
that would only point to a structural shift in India's trade portfolio. While painful in the short term, such a 
shift may ultimately be desirable, as India's heavy dependence on the U.S. export market has now 
exposed it to both diplomatic and economic vulnerability. 
I