Testing governance: On the Sawalkote Hydroelectric Project 
National security and ecological responsibility reinforce each other 
resh impetus for the Sawalkote Hydroelectric Project, planned as a 1.8-GW scheme on the 
Chenab, coincides with India's unilateral suspension of the Indus Waters Treaty (IWT) after 
the Pahalgam attack, giving it a geopolitical symbolism that risks overshadowing questions 
relating to the environmental impact. The Union Ministries of Power and Home Affairs have 
repeatedly stressed its strategic value to press for exemptions from impact and carrying 
capacity studies. But other factors cannot be wished away with a wand. The Chenab already hosts the 
Dulhasti, Baglihar, and Salal projects, in a "bumper-to-bumper" hydropower corridor. Ignoring cumulative 
impact here means underestimating compounded sediment loads and slope instability. The gravity 
dam proposed at Sawalkote, despite being described as run-of-river, will form a reservoir of over 50,000 
crore litres, rendering it functionally closer to a storage dam. Its estimated cost has risen by ₹9,000 crore 
due to inflation and prolonged administrative uncertainty. The NHPC Limited's recent record in 
comparable Himalayan projects shows many schedule slippages and cost overruns. Finally, 
rehabilitation costs account for just 0.6% of total expenditure whereas nearly 1,500 families will have to 
be resettled and 847 hectares of forests will have to be diverted. 
In strategic terms, the project's timing signals India's intent to operationalise its entitlement over western 
rivers following the IWT's suspension. Keeping the treaty in abeyance also removed procedural 
constraints, allowing projects such as Sawalkote and the Wullar Barrage to go ahead. However, this 
approach risks diminishing India's credibility as a riparian state that abides by treaties, particularly in 
fora where it advocates rule-based transboundary governance. Pakistan has already challenged the 
suspension's legality vis-à-vis the 1960 framework. Should India proceed with multiple large projects 
without cooperative mechanisms, future negotiations may potentially invite third-party scrutiny - 
precisely what it has long resisted. In any case, strategic assertion should come with ecological 
restraint, and would require regional studies and protocols to manage sediments for all future projects, 
regardless of treaty status. India should also institutionalize data transparency through regional or 
multilateral platforms, converting hydrological monitoring from a security risk into a confidence-building 
measure, which would also align strategic autonomy with stewardship. Sawalkote's legacy will 
ultimately depend on whether India realizes that national security and ecological responsibility reinforce 
each other. 
F


Inflation lessons: On the inflation data and the RBI 
The Reserve Bank of India will have to be more accurate in its predictions 
The September 2025 retail inflation data, at a 99-month low of 1.54%, has important policy 
implications for the RBI in particular. Except for August, retail inflation has slowed in every 
month this financial year. The average rate of inflation for the first half of the fiscal is 2.2%, just 
within the RBI's comfort band of 2%-6%. When inflation was at the higher end of this band, the 
RBI had repeatedly said that its target was 4%, and that it would not rest until inflation was at 
that level. There is an argument to be made for the central bank to strive for that same target now that 
inflation is repeatedly coming in below that mark. Consistently low inflation means that supply is 
comfortably outstripping demand. Inflation in the clothing and footwear category, for example, was at 
2.3% in September 2025, and has been falling pretty consistently for the last two years. This is not a 
good place to be in, especially now. Faced with the same oversupply problem, albeit at a much larger 
scale, China is increasingly depending on demand from abroad to absorb its supply. This has not exactly 
been India's forte historically, and the current tariff tensions affect exports. The government has tried to 
stimulate domestic demand through income-tax and GST rate reductions. Households have been using 
the direct tax rebate to bolster their savings and reduce debt rather than increase consumption. GST 
rate cuts also led to only a temporary spurt in purchases. 
What is needed is a sustained increase in real wages, and for that the private sector needs to step up. It 
is good news that private sector investment announcements grew strongly in the first half of this year, but 
those need to translate into real projects on the ground soon. One way that the RBI can help is to cut 
interest rates significantly in the next Monetary Policy Committee meeting in December. With inflation so 
low and private investment needing a boost, it is better to err on the side of accommodation than 
conservatism. The other policy issue the RBI needs to deal with is the inaccuracy of its forecasts. In 
April, it had predicted that inflation for the year would be 4%. Later, it consistently revised this forecast, 
arriving at 2.6% at the latest meeting in end-September. While factors influencing inflation are dynamic, 
such a drastic revision of the forecast in just six months shows that something is wrong with the RBI's 
estimation process. Since a key aspect of its work is with inflation prediction, this is a deficiency that it 
should address quickly. 
T