Radical tunnel: On the Physics Nobel 2025 
The Physics Nobel exemplifies value of inquiry not driven by immediate utility 
ohn Clarke, Michel Devoret and John Martinis's experiments in the 1980s proved that the strange 
laws of quantum mechanics could govern not just subatomic particles but entire circuits visible to 
the eye. Their discovery of macroscopic quantum tunnelling and energy quantisation in an 
electric circuit won them the 2025 Physics Nobel Prize. This marks a significant interval since 
quantum mechanics last directly featured in a Physics Nobel, noticeable given the field's enduring 
vitality, and at a time when the world anticipates profound revolutions in computing and 
communications. Their experiments at the University of California, demonstrated quantum 
behaviour in a circuit comprising two superconductors separated by an ultrathin insulating barrier, also 
known as a Josephson junction. In classical physics, a current flowing through this system would be 
trapped in a zero-voltage state unless it had enough energy to cross the barrier. But at temperatures 
near absolute zero, they found that the current could escape by 'tunnelling' through the barrier, a 
uniquely quantum phenomenon. The system also behaved as if it were a single large particle, with 
discrete energy levels instead of a continuous range. To ensure these effects were not artefacts of 
noise in the circuits, the team took elaborate pains to isolate them from stray microwave radiation. Their 
results confirmed that a superconducting phase difference, a collective property of the trillions of pairs of 
electrons that sustained superconductivity, behaved as a single quantum variable. 
Josephson junctions are the foundation of superconducting qubits, which animate many of today's 
leading quantum computers; superconducting circuits also underpin ultrasensitive magnetometers, 
quantum voltage standards and single-photon detectors used in astronomy and biomedical imaging. By 
confirming that quantum laws apply to objects "big enough to hold in your hand", the laureates opened a 
new domain of applied quantum engineering. Today, the challenge is not to prove that macroscopic 
quantum behaviour exists but to preserve it long enough to be useful. Quantum states are exquisitely 
sensitive to their surroundings; research thus focuses on materials with lower loss, better filtering and 
cryogenic control and hybrid architectures that combine superconducting circuits with mechanical, 
photonic or spin-based systems. The 2025 prize also exemplifies the value of inquiry driven solely by 
curiosity about nature's limits. When the laureates set out to test whether quantum mechanics could 
govern a macroscopic electrical circuit, no one foresaw its consequences. Their pursuit of a 
fundamental question produced the principles underpinning the pursuit of engineers today, including in 
India, of new technologies - and prestige for their host countries.


Kept in check: On the 2025 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 
The Nobel laureates' work has redefined the immune system itself 
The 2025 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine has recognised discoveries that transformed 
the scientific understanding of autoimmune regulation. Today, researchers are exploring these 
conditions' genetic, molecular, and environmental determinants, paving the way for early 
diagnoses and targeted interventions. An important chunk of this advance is owed to the work 
of Mary Brunkow, Fred Ramsdell, and Shimon Sakaguchi, who established the role of 
regulatory T-cells (Tregs) and the transcription factor FOXP3. In the 1990s, immunologists had 
already defined the deletion of self-reactive T-cells during maturation, yet this process could 
not account for the persistence of autoreactive T-cells in healthy individuals. Sakaguchi figured that an 
additional mechanism must operate in the periphery. In 1995, his team identified a subset of CD4⁺ T-
cells that, when they were removed from mice, led to multiple autoimmune disorders, while restoring the 
cells prevented disease. Next, Brunkow and Ramsdell, then at Celltech Chiroscience, found that male 
scurfy mice developed severe multi-organ autoimmunity and died within weeks of birth. They were able 
to narrow the mutation to the X chromosome, identifying an insertion in the DNA that truncated a 
previously unknown gene. They named it FOXP3, and found that losing it led to immune collapse. Soon, 
clinical collaborations reported mutations in FOXP3 in boys with a lethal autoimmune disorder. These 
findings together established that self-tolerance rested on a molecular switch governing the 
differentiation and maintenance of Tregs. 
Today, in autoimmune diseases, experimental treatments aim to expand or stabilise Tregs. Early clinical 
trials have shown that reinforcing this cell population can mitigate harmful immune activation without 
broad immunosuppression. In transplantation, engineered Tregs are being infused to improve graft 
acceptance. In cancer, researchers are exploring selective depletion or reprogramming of tumour-
associated Tregs to enhance immunity without triggering autoimmunity. Beyond therapy, the conceptual 
shift brought on by the laureates' work has redefined the immune system: from an on/off apparatus to a 
dynamic ecosystem of activation and restraint. That Brunkow and Ramsdell conducted their work within 
industry also underscores how private sector research can yield significant discoveries. But even now, 
some immunologists caution against underestimating the field's incremental nature. In a testament to 
the broader landscape including overlapping layers of control rather than a single molecular pathway, 
researchers face several obstacles to translating what they know to safe, scalable therapies. Cell-based 
therapies' high cost has also accentuated inequities in access, creating ethical and policy challenges.