Divided state: On the U.S., a fractured polity 
The U.S. needs a new enlightened leadership in the two major parties 
The shooting of Charlie Kirk, a controversial, outspoken conservative commentator and 
political ally of U.S. President Donald Trump, has revealed, once again, the depth of 
polarisation of opinion in the country and its disturbing proclivity towards using lethal violence 
to settle debates. Ironically, Kirk was a vocal advocate of the Second Amendment right to bear 
arms, even as he espoused a range of right-wing values at liberal university campuses, and in 
curbing abortion rights, and limiting the rights of transgender and LGBTQ persons - all the while 
recruiting young voters to the Republican cause. The man arrested on suspicion of shooting him, Tyler 
Robinson, is said to have diverged from his own conservative family roots although few specifics or 
possible motives are established so far. This much is clear: years of political vitriol backed by policies 
built on the values of nativism, revisionism, exclusion, religiosity, and a hateful intolerance of social and 
ideological diversity have brought the shutters down on any channels for open-minded dialogue and 
bipartisanship that might have existed earlier. 
The U.S. is at a crossroads in terms of its standing as a moral and economic force espousing, 
respectively, for the merits of democracy and capitalism. Given the crackdown on and deportations of 
students, academics and residents protesting atrocities in Gaza, and the cruel family separations 
resulting from immigration raids, there are many who would doubt the claim that the U.S. remains the 
bedrock of substantive democracy. Economically, the rules-based international order that emerged 
through the years of the Washington Consensus stands in a shambles in some regards, with Mr. 
Trump's tariff policy that fuelled a worldwide trade war bringing global supply chains to their knees. 
Nowhere is the impact of these tectonic shifts in the U.S.'s ideological and policy posture more keenly 
felt than on its own soil, with Democrats on the retreat after two Trump terms, and Republicans 
embracing their President's political agenda, which is only an amorphous version of the classic 
conservatism that many of them adhere to. When conversations across the aisle fall silent, fear looms 
large, especially for minorities pushed to the fringes of the political discourse, and the desperate on all 
sides fall back on toxic gun culture to give vent to their frustrations with the status quo. Given that 
numerous past Presidents have tried and failed to start conversations on common sense gun control 
reform, including no fewer than 17 attempts by Barack Obama to introduce such legislation in Congress, 
it is only the emergence of a new, enlightened leadership in both parties that could hold out hope for a 
less fractured and hateful polity in the post-Trump years. 
T


A brief respite: On India's August trade data, U.S. tariff impact 
The full effects of the 50% tariffs will reflect in September's trade data 
India's August trade data by the Commerce and Industry Ministry must come as a respite for the 
Central government, as it faces demands ranging from interest subvention to loan repayment 
moratoriums from labour-intensive sectors such as seafood and textiles and apparels. But there is 
no telling how long this respite will last, as it largely depends on the trajectory of the renewed 
trade negotiations between India, and its largest trading partner, the United States, amid 
America's punishing 50% tariffs on imports applicable from August 27. Goods exports in August rose 
6.7% year-on-year (YoY) to $35.10 billion, while imports declined by 10.12% to $61.59 billion, led by 
steep falls in inward shipments of gold (-57% YoY) and silver (-60% YoY). As a result, merchandise 
trade deficit narrowed to $26.49 billion in August from July's $27.35 billion. But the strains of the U.S.'s 
25% "reciprocal tariffs", that kicked in on August 7, show in the sequential drop in exports. Goods exports 
in August to the U.S. dropped to $6.86 billion from $8.01 billion in July, while overall exports shrunk to 
$35.10 billion in August from $37.24 billion in July and $35.14 billion in June. This suggests that the 
scramble for stockpiling by American importers has begun to slow and the full effects of the 50% tariffs 
will reflect in September's trade data. While U.S. shipments in electronics, gem and jewellery and 
engineering goods saw mild declines in August, textiles witnessed the sharpest fall of about 2.7% YoY. 
To be sure, these sectors witnessed impressive YoY overall growth. Not surprisingly, drugs and 
pharmaceuticals, a sector that is exempt from the tariffs, have done well sequentially and on-year, with 
exports growing 6.94% YoY to $2.51 billion in August. 
What is worrying is the sharp decline in imports across products and sectors - transport equipment (-
26.54%), coal and allied products (-26.2%), wood and allied products (-14.46%) and iron and steel (-
10.98%). This suggests either a slowing in economic activity, or an attempt to find cheaper domestic 
suppliers in the wake of tariff-related price pressures. Lower merchandise imports might be good for the 
deficit, but a sudden decrease such as this is alarming. What is also telling is that despite strained 
diplomatic relations between India and China, Beijing remains a top trading nation for India. That China 
remains a main source of imports (grew by 10.19%, April-August) shows that diplomacy and economic 
relations are far removed from each other. 
I