VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Statutory 
A. native 
2. Proliferation 
B. obscurity 
3. Conducive 
C. helpful 
4. Ambiguity 
D. expansion 
5. Indigenous 
E. legal 
Answer: 
1-E 
2- D 
3- C 
4- B 
5- A 

            Change for the worse: On MGNREGA to VB-G RAM G 
The move to alter MGNREGS beyond recognition must be dropped 
The Viksit Bharat - Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin), or VB-G RAM G Bill, 
tabled in the Lok Sabha on Tuesday to replace the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), deserves to be rejected for more than one reason. 
What is sought to be changed is not only the nomenclature but also the fundamental character 
of the existing Scheme (MGNREGS). This marks yet another attempt by the BJP-led 
government at the Centre to reduce the size of the development space to States. The only plausible 
reason for the name change is the fact that the BJP's ideological master, the RSS, had strong 
differences with Gandhi. The use of Gandhi's name in the 20-year-old scheme signifies the link to his 
Gram Swaraj concept that gives importance to democratic decentralization. But the new Bill, by 
making the Union government virtually the sole decision maker in the proposed law, will not make any 
positive contribution in this direction. Supporters of the government point out that the increase in the 
days of work to 125 in a year is a major benefit for people in rural India. But, the data, on employment 
given to households under the MGNREGS, reveal that it was only during 2020-21, the COVID-19 
pandemic year, that 9.5% (nearly 7.2 million) of households actually worked for 100 days. Over the last 
two years, only around 7% of families could get the full quota. 
By calling the VB-G RAM G "a centrally sponsored scheme", the Union government has done away with 
the special status that the MGNREGS had enjoyed, wherein it had been absorbing the entire cost of 
wages payment for unskilled manual labour. In the proposed scheme, the fund-sharing pattern 
between the Centre and States generally would be 60:40. A benefit of the existing scheme was that 
rural wages have gone up sharply. The finances of States are not in a robust condition and there are 
apprehensions about the likely impact of the restructuring of the GST. Besides, when direct cash transfer 
schemes are increasingly being viewed as a political game changer, it is an open secret that not many 
States will be keen on participating in the fresh scheme. More importantly, the soul of the current law - 
a bottom up demand-based scheme - has been taken away. What has been proposed is a supply-
driven framework wherein allocations will be capped, as decided by the Union government. Also, States 
will have to bear any excess expenditure, which is a new feature. Tamil Nadu and Kerala have opposed 
the Bill citing an undermining of States' interests. A feature of the Bill, which is meant to ensure that 
work does not clash with farm work during sowing/harvesting, may be included explicitly in the 
MGNREGS, after consultations with States. Howsoever passionately Minister for Rural Development 
Shivraj Singh Chouhan may say that the new law is in line with Gandhi's sentiments, good governance, 
T

            which is the goal of the idea of Ram Rajya, does not become a reality without diffused grassroots 
democracy - a condition neither sought to be promoted nor nourished by the proposed legislation.


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Clash 
A. nurtured 
2. Nourished 
B. credible 
3. Undermine 
C. conflict 
4. Plausible 
D. strong 
5. Robust 
E. weaken 
Answer: 
1-C 
2- A 
3- E 
4- B 
5- D 

            Temporary relief: On trade performance, deeper distress ahead 
The depreciation of the rupee is helping bring down trade deficit 
India's remarkable merchandise trade performance in November should come as some relief for 
the government, but should not be the basis for any complacency. India's merchandise exports, 
hit by the stiff headwind of 50% tariffs by the United States, the biggest export destination, 
unexpectedly grew 19.4% to $38.1 billion in November 2025. This is the highest it has been in any 
November in the last 10 years. Also, India's exports to the U.S. grew 22.6% to $6.98 billion in 
November 2025 as compared to November 2024. This was also 10.7% higher than in October 2024. 
This is all certainly welcome news, but it hides an element of deeper distress that will make itself 
apparent in the months ahead. While exports to the U.S. recovered in November, exporters say that this 
is because they are absorbing the hit of the higher tariffs, hoping that they will be short-lived. The other 
option, of losing customers and trying to win them back later after moderation of tariffs, is seen to be 
harder, at least for now. However, it might soon be the only option. Indian exporters to the U.S., a large 
chunk of which are micro, small, and medium enterprises in labour-intensive sectors, cannot continue 
absorbing the tariff impact for too long. The depreciating rupee is helping offset some of the impact, but 
India's tariff differential with competing countries is too big to overcome. It also takes some time for 
supply chains to reroute. Reports are already coming in that exporters are seeing a significant drop in 
orders for January. 
The trade deficit also shrank because India's merchandise imports fell 1.9% to $62.7 billion in November 
2025. Reducing imports is a tricky topic for India. While it is preferable to reduce import dependence in 
the medium term, India's domestic capabilities are not yet robust enough to shoulder the load. Falling 
merchandise imports, therefore, suggest slackening demand. Coming so soon after the Goods and 
Services Tax rate reductions, this should be monitored carefully by the government. The broad outlines 
of the government's Export Promotion Mission show that the government is thinking about how to 
alleviate the financial stress being faced by exporters. However, the detailed schemes have not been 
notified yet. These must be expedited. The government could also perhaps adapt some of its more 
successful COVID-era relief measures as well. For example, a credit guarantee scheme for exporters will 
do them more good than the planned moratorium on loan repayments will. Of course, these troubles will 
go away once the tariffs issue is resolved, which the government is saying will happen "very soon". But 
the decision on this lies with the mercurial U.S. President Donald Trump. As such, the most prudent 
way forward is to hope for the best but continue preparing for the worst. 
I