VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct 
meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Appended 
A. guess 
2. Conjecture 
B. attached 
3. Commended 
C. clear 
4. Traceability 
D. detectability 
5. Translucent 
E. praised 
Answer: 
1-B  
2- A 
3- E 
4- D 
5- C 

            New horizons: On COP30 in Brazil 
Developing countries must take the lead in addressing the climate crisis 
The 30th edition of the Conference of Parties (COP) has begun in Brazil's Belém. Coming 10 
years after the historic Paris Agreement, when all signatory members of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) committed to a common goal of 
keeping temperatures below 2°C and "as far as possible below 1.5C", this would have been an 
ideal platform to take stock of the achievements so far and ramp up ambition. Instead, there is 
a visible sense of disarray. The United States has, yet again, withdrawn from the Paris Agreement 
(though not the UNFCCC) and from 2017, this break seems decisively more hostile. Wielding threats on 
tariffs and brinkmanship, the U.S. Administration seems actively committed to derail steps toward 
emission cuts, newer ways to fund adaptation and adopting clean technology. For instance, it has played 
a major role in recent months in scuttling a resolution by members of the International Maritime 
Organization (IMO) into transitioning the shipping industry away from fossil fuel use. Following Bill 
Gates's shift from being a vocal advocate of curbing emissions to one who no longer sees climate 
change as an existential threat, Mr. Trump announced it as a "vindication" of his position. There is a 
case that the U.S.'s isolationist policy is of diminishing relevance in an era when global investments in 
clean energy outpace fossil fuel investment and that businesses globally have seen the writing on the 
wall. But as the IMO example states, the U.S.'s abilities as a destabilizing force remain formidable. 
That must be at the back of negotiators' minds when they began the 12-day deliberative sprint. 
This COP is one of 'implementation', as the Brazil Presidency has emphasised. While the world's 
collective action is far short of what the Paris goals require, there is palpable optimism that the tenor of 
discussions from now on will visibly shift toward ironing out financial mechanisms for adaptation, 
preserving forests and strengthening carbon credit markets. It is likely that there will be a renewed 
discussion on how to make the United Nations' multilateral process more effective at delivering decisive 
outcomes and, perhaps, a debate on the creation of a 'climate council', as Brazil proposed earlier this 
year. All of this promises fresh energy and verve to a process that has come to be seen as ineffective in 
addressing the climate crisis. However, this is also an opportunity for the large developing economies - 
India, China, Brazil, and South Africa in particular - to stake claim to leadership. This might require a 
greater display of ambition and recalibration of past positions, particularly on financial contributions. 
Sans fireworks, India must begin an internal dialogue to place itself favourably for this nebulous future. 
T


VOCAB REVISION 
Match the words in Column A with their correct 
meanings in Column B. 
Column A 
Column B 
1. Galloped 
A. bottleneck 
2. Logjam 
B. surged 
3. Furloughed 
C. impaired 
4. Pragmatic 
D. suspended 
5. Crippled 
E. practical 
Answer: 
1-B 
2- A 
3- D 
4- E 
5- C 

            Greater openness: On India and wildlife management 
India must not squander global trust in its management of wildlife 
In September, a Supreme Court-constituted Special Investigation Team (SIT) reported to the Court 
that Reliance Foundation's Vantara project in Jamnagar, Gujarat - India's largest private zoo - 
had been above board in the manner in which it had gone about acquiring wild animals from 
abroad; it had the right permits and the facilities for the upkeep of over 30,000 animals and that any 
criticism or aspersion of its activities on these grounds were wholly "unjustified". The Court chose 
not to make the report public and only appended a summary in its order with the operative observations. 
What the report contained in its entirety becomes relevant given that a global body has made some 
concerning observations and "recommended" that India's wildlife authorities pause the issue of permits 
that allow endangered animals to be imported by zoos. This came after the CITES committee - the 
most influential agreement on cross-border wildlife movement - visited Jamnagar. The visit was just 
after the SIT had submitted its report to the Court and from what is known from its exhaustive, public 
report, investigated the same issues as the SIT: permits, acquisition of animals, the facilities in 
Jamnagar. The CITES committee too commended Vantara's infrastructure and the expertise available 
for animal care. Its observations on the issue of permits casts aspersions on India's wildlife management 
system, not on Vantara. 
The committee's reservations stemmed from observations that permit codes accompanying several 
animal transfers did not always accurately reflect the arrangement between the exporting country and 
India. For instance, the Czech Republic says that it had "sold" several animals to the procuring arms of 
Vantara, which denies it was a sale and that the costs incurred were ancillary (insurance and transport). 
The distinction is important because Indian laws do not allow its zoos to commercially procure animals. 
The primary objective of CITES, an international convention, is to curb animal trafficking and while 
lacking enforcement powers, expects countries to execute and incorporate checks into their wildlife 
laws. CITES does not discourage cross-border commercial transactions and only insists that these are 
properly recorded, with proper traceability of the animals being moved. In several instances, the 
committee has observed that India's authorities ought to be more proactive in engaging with 
counterparts in other countries to investigate suspect traceability. It is a matter of conjecture whether 
the Court-appointed committee also had similar observations to make. Translucent disclosure only 
reduces global trust in India's wildlife management and as home to some of the most important 
biospheres, that is a reputation it can ill afford. 
I